*the respondent was clarifying her daughter’s situation before the beginning of the questionnaire.
R: i had a daughter who was held captive by ISIS for three years,she was three years old when she was held captive,and she stayed for three years with them which means she became six years and 4 months old.they told me an aircraft bombed the location where she was.
I: did she pass away?
R: yes, we went to iraq.
Audio file name: [006]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim	.C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî	/êC01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî	 yî?C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: khalah …….your birthday? do you know the day your birth date? 
*khalah is a polite way to start a conversation with an older woman it literally means aunt in english 
R: my birth date?i almost got into my 40,but still haven't completed 40 but i am 40. 
R: when i applied for a passport i wrote 40,it was like this in Iraq
C04 What is your marital status?C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?  
R: yes,, I am married 
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê	 ye?”C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
I: your husband?
R: Isis killed him
I: killed or captured?
R: killed, we know nothing about him
I: you are a widow then
R: yes
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te	 re dijîn?C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: how many people live with you now? I mean you and children, how many of you live together?
R: me and son and 2 daughters and another daughter,she is married
I: your married daughter lives alone?
R: yes, we are four here
I: you and a son and 2 daughters,and the married daughter by herself
R: yes, a son and 2 daughters and the oldest is married
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî	 ne?C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
I: the persons you mentioned before are your children right?
R: what?
I: the 2 boys and a girl are your children.
R: a boy and 2 girls yes,they are my kids
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe	)?C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
2 girls and a boy.
the oldest is married
C09 Can you read and write a si	mple message in any language?C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I:Khala khonav  can you write or read in your or any language? 
R: write? what to write?
I: no,i meant in general
R: no i don't know how to write 
I: can you read?
R: this? (she points to the Arabic version of the agreement)
I: yes,or even Kurdish
R: no i don't know to read well,we attend school now but even though i still don't know anything
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu	 gishtiC10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: which level of school have you finished? until which grade?
R: i studied in Iraq for six years,went to an Arabic school.
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
Sixth grade
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe	)?C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: do you go to school now?
R: yes,its been 6 months and a week,im only familiar with the easy part 
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî	 dibistanê?C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
X
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar	 diki?C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: are you working now? do you work and get paid for it?
R: no
I: No?
R: we only go to school,me and my children.
C15 If yes	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?, what is your current work?C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre 	 C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?Arbeit?
x
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik	 biki?C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: do want to get a job?do you want to find a job,go to work,have a job?do you like to?
R: i can't.
C18 If not, why not?C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar 	biki?C18 Falls nein, warum	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?nicht?
R: i can't,im ill,if i wasn't ill i would like to find a job
R: if i find a good job and i learn the language,perhaps
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar	 kir?C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: before ISIS attacks, did you work outside of your house back in Iraq? 
R: no,i did not work but my husband did,i raised my children and cooked.
C20 If yes C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?, what was your work?C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?C20 Wenn ja, was war 	 C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna	 me nebeC21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
I:we still have questions to ask khala and i want to inform you again that this information your giving is confidential.
R: ok.
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te	 chiya?C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: what is your religion? like are you Muslim,christian?
R: I am Yazidi 
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te	 chiyeC23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
Yazidi
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê	 yî?C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: what is your ethnic group?kurd?turkman?yazidi?
R: Yazidi
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te	 chiye?C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
Yazidi
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONSPêşik û Şertên	 nihaPrioritäten und 	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivi	mD00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: now khala,we want to ask you several questions,we want to know about your priorities and the most important thing to you in life?
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und  in D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?Ihrem Leben?
I: in your life now, what is the most important thing to you? your priorities? 
R: in my life I think about my husband,if he was still alive i hope he returns to us
I: beside that,your husband has passed away may god bless his soul,and may he rest in peace,what else can you tell us,what are your top priorities in life now?
R: i think about my parents and family and my brother.
I: are your parents alive?
R: my mother died when she was held by ISIS
I: your father?
R: my father died before ISIS’s attack
I: ISIS killed your husband?
R: yes
I: beside thinking about your family,your mother your brother,is there anything else you think about?
R: we think about the children,how to live,establish a life with our children and so on.
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe	 ava bibe?D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: what do you think you need the most now to  build your life?the most important element,the most important thing so you could move on and build your life?
R: we think about what happened to us,what we have been through and that's it.
R: we went through a terrible time,our homes were taken,our men were killed,our children have suffered a lot,our life has been destroyed,let the children live theirs.
I: how about your children,you have them with you thank god,what do you think? don't you think to rebuild your life again for them? do you think its hard?
R: how?
I: What I meant is I know you have your children with you now, doesn't that make a little bit of difference to think about the future ?
R: No.
R: i just hope they live happily and a healthy life but that's it.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te	 heye?D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: now khala,i will give you a scale from 0-4 ,i will read you some options and you will have to pick from 0-4 ,much control would you say you have over your life now  do you think you have control over your life? How much do you feel that you are strong? i want you to know that the questions we are asking are all Psychological questions.
R: i don't think about anything Psychologically
I: ok,but do you feel like you are strong and you have control? from 0-4
R: i don't know
I:  How much do you feel that you are strong? like you are not lost,you know and you are determined and you have control?
R: when i feel Powerless I try to control myself
I:  from 0 to 4  how much do you feel that you are in control?
I:  0 is the weakest 4 is the strongest and the rest are middle like half half
R:  you mean like if I think about myself?
I:  I mean like how much do you think you are in control of your life how much do you think that? I will explain, you know because you went through awful and painful period in your life,And you experienced violence with Isis, now what do you feel inside, do you feel like you have control over your life? do you feel like you are a strong person or a weak one?  did you understand what I have said?
R: They didn't do anything that personally, but they stole from us they killed our Men and so on.
i:  due to these events how much do you feel overall that you have control over your life? do you feel weak or do you feel like you are strong person? do you feel like you have control over your life?
R:  control?
I:  do you know what does control mean? You know when you feel like you have control, like anything happens or occurs in your life you are capable of taking control over it.
R: ___
I: You didn't understand the question, didn't you?
R: They were so bad,  they have done awful things to us, things you cannot imagine,  they killed from us they killed our Men.
I:  I understand but our question is not related to this topic, you're talking about a psychological thing, When I asked you about how much do you feel you have control over your life, you know like when you make a decision, you know what decision means?
R: yes
I:  do you feel like you can take a firm decision, I feel like you are capable of seeing right from wrong, or make a decision ,Can I do this can I not do that do you feel like you have control over your decisions over your life?
R:  like what?
I:  it's like when I tell you ok can you now make a decision over something, do you feel like you're capable of taking or making a decision, whatever the decision is about, it's in general.
R: I have never made  a bad decision.
I:  but if it's a good decision do you think you can take it.
R: yes
I:  so you feel like you are capable of doing that , you have control enough to make any decisions.
R: yes
I: So you feel you're strong enough
R:  yes as long as my children are safe and living a  Good Life
I: 0-4  how much do you feel you are strong
R:  in a bad life no, but as long as my life is good my children are with me I feel pretty strong .
I: On scale 0-4 how strong you feel you are?
R: 2
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere	 hazirkriye?D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: what do you think the future, the upcoming days are holding for you? what is waiting for you in that future?It's ok it's not a scale the professor has to write it down.
R: I feel good about it, I always think that they will be good days ahead 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I:  if peace took place in Iraq , do you ever want to return to Iraq or stay in Germany or go to Kurdistan or other country?
R: Germany has been a great country to us, And since Iraq has been destroyed I don't ever think to return there 
I: yes, but we are asking  if the situation became much better do you want to return or stay here in germany? 
R: no one really knows if peace will ever take over
I: yes, i understand that you don't know, but let's say you know and then peace took over, Will you stay here in Germany or return to Iraq ?
R: If police took over and everything in their work returned as it was before,  and  if our people and  our Men were there too,  you know they took everything from us even our homes they left us with nothing,  no one is left.
I:  so if peace took over, will you return?
R:  if the situation improves .
I: Iraq or Kurdistan?
R:  I don't know. 
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn 	wir?D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?auswählen?
I: We said before that if the situation in Iraq improves, you want to return. could you please tell me why did you choose that location?
R:  it doesn't necessarily mean that I will return.  I have no idea what the future holds for me.
I: Yes I understand but we are saying that  if the situation improves,  let's see if.You said before that if the situation improves I would like to return to Iraq
R:  I am not sure of returning, let's say half (like 50%) 
I: Ok I understand but let's say that the situation improves why did you choose this location?  why would you like to return is it because you love to or you want to return to your land, You need to give me a reason why you chose to return to this location.
R:  first of all because it's my land where my family where my parents grew.
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate	 tebe?D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: do you feel like Germany is your home? 
R: Germany has been a great country for us
I:  how great? 0-4 
R:  it is very great, country they practically raise our children for us, Put the children schools,  care about them,  they take us to doctors,  it's very good
I: extremely?
R: yes, great
I:  Here is the strongest here is the weakest (  while the interpreter was pointing on the scale from 0 to 4) 
R: great
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas	 bû?D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: you have been here for two years, what could you say about your experience? was it good?
R: very good
I: very good?
R: extremely good
R: We don't have any financial aid there we had nothing there
*there: means in Iraq
R: No homes no people, nothing. 
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin	?D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I:You said before that your kids insured here, what do you mean by that?
R:  they go to school,  back there they were homeless, they had no family, they had nothing.
I: that's right 
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen	 könnten?
I: if for instance we say that you want to return to Iraq or to the Kurdistan region what should happen what changes should take place so you could feel safe there?In your opinion what should happen in order for you to return to Iraq, in order for you to feel safe to return, what should be done?
R:  we have nothing there, they brought us some caravans to live in.
I:  I know but I am asking if you were to return to Iraq or if you want to return
R:  I don't know the situation there now, I know nothing. 
I: Let's assume that the situation in Iraq improved,  and you  want to return to iraq,  imagine that I'm telling you a story now and follow up with me,  let's say the situation has improved and you want to return in your opinion what should be done so you could return to Iraq so you could feel safe,  I know the situation is messed up now in Iraq especially in your area,  what do you think should be done so you could return?
R:  if only our people could return from the war .
I: which war are you talking about,do you mean if your men returned from ISIS captivity?
R: yes
R: Nothing is left.
I:  I understand, I know.
I: Beside these things, do you think anything else should happen  in Iraq so you could feel safe, so you could know that it's safe now to  return, you know the things about Isis and anything else, I mean after Isis gets out of Iraq, it's safe for you then right? or not
R: no
I: I mean let's sayif they tell you that Iraq is now safe and it's completely isis  free,Or do you feel no matter what they say or what you see that you'll always have the fear of Isis and you will never feel safe to return 
R: The fear of isis  prevents everyone to return to Iraq. 
R: never.
R: you know we will always be afraid of ISIS.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û 	BERPIRSIYARÎGerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din ji bikimE00 Wir diskutierten bereit's zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu 	E00 Wir diskutierten bereit's zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi	 be?E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: khala, Do you know what does Justice mean?  have you ever heard the word justice?
R: justice (she said another word in kurmanji/shingali dialect)
I:  justice means when someone gives your right back to you, it's like when someone does something bad to you, and then you get your right back from this person or people,This is called Justice
R:  yes that would be great.
I: what does Justice mean to you?
R:  when everything gets better like before and life becomes better
I: How do you think the situation should get back the way it was before?  could you please tell us how?
R:  how to explain? 
I: How do you think that the situation should get back the way it was before? 
R: It is very hard
I:  could you explain how? homes,land?
R:  people,our land
I: And, what else?
R:  when we were back in Iraq we didn't need anything from anyone,  our men used to work and provide for us,  our children situation was good , our territory was beautiful, but nothing left.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina e ji we re çiqas girîng (muhi	m)e?E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?ist?
I: how important is it for you to have justice (literally said how important is it for you to have your right back) from 0-4?
R: a lot, it would be great to have our rights brought  back 
I: yes
R: we say we hope someone can do it
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: how much do you feel or how much hope do you have that you will get your right back?
R: we say we have hope that one day everything will get better
I: half half?
R: just hoping (she literally said “ sugar coating the reality)
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: how important it for you for the criminals to be held accountable?how important is it for you?
R: A lot
R: extremely
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa 	bersiv da?E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?haben?
I: why is it very important for you that they are held accountable?
R:how? i didn't understand?
I: Why is it important for you, do you know what does important mean in this dialect? 
R: no,I do not understand your dialect very well
I:  yes I know my  dialect is a bit different than yours
I: Why do  you feel it is important for you that the people who violated your rights should be held accountable?
R: i don't know
I: As We Know,  Isis has taken away your homes your rights, your women Your Men,ok?
R: yes,Even our children
I:  your children too
R:  yes they took our children from us,  they took everything
I:  ok so how much is it important for you that these people who were responsible for these actions I mean Isis, how important is it for you that they held accountable for their actions?
R: when a man has an enemy _______
I:  what do you feel the punishment should be for those members of Isis?  
R: everything bad  
I: can you give me an example?how? do you want them killed? beaten?
R: whatever bad things they have done to us,i wish them the same and worse.
R: the pain they have caused is still locked up in our stomach 
*A kurdish term that expresses the amount of pain and fear a person faces.
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who should be held accountable?  for example do you think Isis or the government?  who should be  punished? Do you know the word punishment? who? Who do you think has done you wrong and should be held accountable?
R:  Isis
I:  only isis? Do you think it was only Isis?
R: yes isis 
R: I don't remember how many of them , There were many nationalities 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: I have asked you before how do you think should be held accountable and you said Isis, and then I asked you how do you think they should be held accountable?
R:  every bit of bad thing that they did to us I hope they  receive worse. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi	 we dike?E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Do you know or have you heard that there are types of people, they want to bring those who should be held accountable to Justice and get you your rights back, have you heard of such thing?
R: how?
I: There are people who wants to bring your right back, have you Heard of such effort?
R: Yes, they talk about it, if they can they will and if they can't -----
I: What do you know about it? what have you heard about it?
R:  I haven't heard what if the countries could help us
I:  like who
R: Countries, government, I know nothing else 
I: What do they do to help you? do you know? Or you just heard of such thing? Do you know if this countries are doing any efforts about this issue?
R:  what?
I:  are you aware of such thing?  or just heard about it in general?
R:   we have heard that they said that since Isis did this to us, The countries started to negotiate about it. 
I: Have you heard about trials to bring isis to justice?have you ever heard about such thing?
R: I have no idea
I :  do you know the court system and how trials work?  you know they bring the criminal to Justice and put him on trial
R:  yes
I:  I think it is a good thing to bring Isis members to court and put them on trial?  do you think that a trial is appropriate or do you think that there should be more?
R: i don't know
I: What the professor meant is, do you think it's appropriate instead of doing to Isis what they have done to you and your family, As  you said before, that someone do to Isis what Isis did to you and your family, the professor said instead of that do you think it's appropriate to bring those Isis members to court and put them on trial, do you think this is a better solution?  or do you want to do the whole process of doing that things to them as they did to you and your family? so do you think Court or punishing them the same  way they did to you.
R : I want them to suffer bad things, worse than what we have been through. 
E09 If yes E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?, which ones?E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan	E09 Falls ja, von E09 Falls ja, von welchen?welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?E10 win dikarin wen zalime 	afubikin?E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?sind?
I: Do you think that people can forgive Isis for what they've done?
R:  I do not believe so
I:  how about you?
R: They were the reason behind our  suffer, how can I forgive them? 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare	 wen afubiki?E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I:You said that you cannot Forgive Them
R:  they did this to us
I:  yes I know, but what do you think should be done in order for you to forgive them? what should be done so you could forgive Isis?
R: Bad things they have done to us.  I simply don't know what to answer you really
*an indication to a negative answer
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.E12 naha hin 	pirsiyame heyeE12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit 	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema Thema
I: There are more questions that we want to ask you,you need to pick from 0-4
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: how important is it for you to know what happened during this fight with Isis? like who has passed away,who has won, how important is it for you to know what is happening during this conflict?
R: our men
I:  not only your men, about everything, everyone, You know like being informed or knowing what is happening what is Isis doing to people to  everyone. how important is it for you from 0 to 4
R: I want to know,  more about the good things. 
I: extremely? half half?
R: how for example? the men they took, the girls they held hostage.
I: How important is it for you to know? like  what happened there? 
*The interpreter literally said who died who won who sat,who stood, it is a common term that means in kurmanji “what is happening in a certain situation?”
R: i strongly want to know
I: extreme?
R: yes
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it for you that  the whole world know what did Isis do to you and to other people ?do you want them to know?how awful human beings they are.Do you want the rest of the world to know? 
R: Iyes, let them know.
I:  how much?
R: 2
I: 2?
R: 2
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that the Next Generation know ?
R: we say,until the end of the world,we want our future generations to know
I: so, is it extreme? half half? 
R: half half
I: half half?
R: yes
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che 	bu?E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?haben?
I: khala, Why is it important for you that the whole world knows What ISIS did to you? why? why is it important?
R:  the world already knows
I: ok,but why Is it important for you the world to know what happened?
R: Because of the amount of pain they have caused us, the amount of tears and sadness they they planted in our hearts, I think the whole world  already knows, don't you know about it?
I:  yes 
I: Do you think that if the people know about this,  it will decrease the amount of pain inside you?
R: Yes it will decrease the amount of pain when we talk,  we always remember what they did to us it's always in our mind,  every single member of them have  caused pain to our  heart and brain. 
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?ist?
I: what should be done so the future generation, people know what ISIS did it you?Some people write about it like journals or on Facebook or internet, Media. Some people write stories about it, what do you think in your opinion should be done so your own story or everyone story to reach out to the world? 
R: When a person tells another and another person  tells the stories to the Next Generation, and so one until everyone from now and the Next Generation understand what happened. 
I: Do you think of any other way so the Next Generation know what happened?
R: about what?
I: About what Isis  did to you, so these stories pass from one generation to another from one person to another, you told me before that you think if a person passed the story to another and then the other person passes the story to their kids and to the Next Generation and so on, so in this way you ensure that the whole world will know what happened, the Next Generation will know.  do you think there's another way  beside the method that you told me about?
R: what other way? 
I: Some people write some people speak about it, some people write it down on the internet or publish it, some people do some interviews on the television, do you think of any other ways?
R:  we talked about it the whole time,  whenever we open up a conversation we talk about it,  we never leave the subject we always talk about it. 
R: Whatever we talk about any subject we always return to the same main subject we always return to ( talking about it) , We never forget about  this subject. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet	 e)?E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheit'skommission gehört?
I: Have you ever heard before about a committee?
R: no
I: You know there are people in a committee.
R: yes
I: Have you ever heard about the truth commission?There is a committee that it's called the truth commission, have you ever heard about it?
R: Committee?
I: yes 
R: A committee? for their conversation?
I: The truth commission is for example contains let's say three or four people.
I:  Have you ever heard about this word, the truth commission? have you heard the bottle before in Iraq or here?
R: no  
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet e) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?E19 Wahrheit'skommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheit'skommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I:  the truth commission, it's a committee that is made by the government,  they go and put the criminals on trial, like  bad people such as Isis, after they finish their job they bring papers and start writing a report about what happened, this committee. this is the truth commission, they always seek the truth about what happened  between Isis and the people.  in your opinion do you think that this committee is appropriate enough for  Isis crimes against you?
R: I want them to bring us our right back
I:  do you think they can
R:  what?
I:  do you think  they are capable?
R:  I don't know
I:  they think they can or they can't
R:  if they want to then they can, we hope that someday they could. 
I: Do you think it's important for you?
R:  if they can they will, we hope that someday they  could.
I:  so it's important for you.  or do you think not, what I mean do you think that this committee, the truth commission is important or you think it's not?
R:  I don't completely understand what you're talking about.
I:  I'm talking about the truth commission that I told you about before
I:  do you want to have a committee to go after Isis and put them on trial, and to seek the truth
R:  it would be great if they do so.
I:  so it's good to have ?
R:  yes
I : And do you want them that after they seek the truth about Isis and the conflict to write about it?
R:   you mean about what Isis  had done?
I:  yes
R: Isis has done all sorts of things
I:  yes,  people of committing to write about it, to write about what Isis did to you? 
R: yes
I: At do you want to know all about the conflict and what isis  did to you, for example what they did they stole they have done to you?
R: i want to.
I: you don't want to?
R: I want to know about what they did to our men to our children, to our women,our girls
I:  why is it important for you to know?
R:  why did they do this to us
I:  ok but why is it important to know about it?
R:  why did they do this to us.
I: why do you want to know
I: what does (wosa) mean?
*wosa is a kurmanji shingali word that means (like that)
R: it means (so) like why did they do so to iraq
I: Who do you think should do this? 
R: whoever
I: whoever,So I think the important thing that you get you right back 
R: We want to have our right back in a clean way 
*clean way is a kurdish term for saying “in a justified way”
R: we always say may God help us to have Justice .
R: we say no other thing.
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: The people who became victims,  do you know what does the word victim mean?
R: The people who got killed
I:  yes
I: What do you think should be done for these people?  what do you want to say about it?what do you think should be done? you know people like you  who became victims. 
R:  ______________
I: You didn't quite understand the question, your poor son for example who got killed may God Rest his soul in peace, he was a victim, he had nothing to do with this war and he got killed, what do you want to say about this,  to all the people who became victims for  Isis, what do you think should be done?
*the correct word is (a daughter) not a son,the interpreter said son
R:  for us
I:  yes for you
R: Whatever you can do, anything with a good outcome.
R:  if you could 
I: So you think every single soul who got killed for nothing,  Held hostage for nothing,  what do you think should we do for  these people? What do you think should be done ?
R: If you could do anything for them and for us
I:  not only us,  I am talking about anyone who is capable of doing anything.  whether it was the government,   or good people,  all of them
R:   whoever,  government, or good people,  I hope they can do something for us, you know. 
I: khala, We understand and know the amount of pain that you have suffered,  the awful things that you went through, how could we help you not only you but every human being, what do you think should be done for  you so  the pain that you are  experiencing could be elaborated, or so  you could forget about it?
R:  I'm not feeling well I'm always not well
I:  you always don't feel well
R:  always 
*ez demi ne sagim: is a kurmanji term means i don't feel well, which is used when a person goes through a loss,like a family member or friend.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getanwerden?
I: What do you think should be done for the Yazidis?
R: It would be great if you do something about the  yazidis
I:  how?
R:   yazidis are poor people, with no support no neighbours, you know their story,they are poor people with no power.
I: Ok, but what do you want to be done for them?
R:We ran away, left our homes and our things.
I:  yes
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a 	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?m?E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich  Opfer E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?anerkannt?
I: do you feel recognized as a victim?Do you feel like people recognise you as a victim
R:  our people the most.my family and friends everyone.
I: How much do you feel that you have became a victim of Isis, how much do you feel recognised as a victim?
R:   what is  victim?
I:  as a victim  of isis 
R: They have done terrible things to us
I: extreme?
R: extreme. 
R: My  whole house,   entire family,  my little daughter she was only 6 years 4 months old, they killed her by Isis I mean, the farting airplane bombed her without knowing who she is. And my husband and my sister-in-law and her mum, we all were held captive for nine months. 
I: How did your daughter die?
R:  I went to Iraq for her
I:  how did she pass away?
R:  the fighting airplane bombed her
I:  so the airplane killed her,  how old was she?
R:  6 years and 4 months.
I: khala?
R: Because of my daughter's death and her images I don't feel  well, I feel powerless.
R:  here she was about   3 years old,  she hasn't been held captive yet
I:   may God  bless her soul
R: what these children have to do with this war? 
E23 Why do you feel that way?E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe 	dibinin?E23 Warum haben	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?Gefühl?
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq	 and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern	 könnte.
I: You know, about the situation in Iraq,  I will start the following question 
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e 	hebe)?F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?bewahren?
I: khala,we will talk now about the situation in iraq in the future,we want to know if you have any hope about the situation in iraq,do you think it will get better?is it possible to have lasting peace in iraq?
R: yes we have hope
I:extremely? or a little bit of hope? or half half? how much?
R: extreme
R: despite the horrible things we faced,we still have hope
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe	 , li her  welêtiki?”F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I:do you think this lasting peace will take place only in iraq or in the whole region of middle east?
R: if only you knew what Arabs did to us.
(the respondent literally said: what Arabs did to us) 
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li Iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu	 schaffen?
I: khala,let's say you have a role in making peace in iraq,what do you think should be done to have it ? what would you like to do in order for the peace to take place?
R: i want it to be better
I: how?
R: to be good,good.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji	 daishe?F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I:khala, do you know what does military mean?you know how the military is going after ISIS right?
R: yes
I:  do you know that?
I: do you know about it or not?
R: yeah, you mean how they do that to ISIS
I: yes, do you know about it?
R: yes
I: do you feel its enough for you? do you think they will go after ISIS and bring you justice?or not?
R: i think if they can they will.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidi	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?Iraq?F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak 	 F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?schützen?
I: if the military was capable of bringing justice for you,What do you think should be done for the Yazidis in order to feel safe?
R: i really hope they do something good for us,but we dont believe as long as the situation remains the same
I: can you explain furthermore,i couldn't understand you.
R: in our hearts we hope for the best but we say we don't know when.
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û 	PÎROZBAHÎErzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye	)?G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I:  since you came to Germany until now, have you ever discussed your experience with anyone, as in your experience with Isis?
R: not much
I: So you only discussed simple details?
R:  yes simple details, we talked about our mental health, and general stuff.
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash 	dikin)?G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?ist?
I: Why didn't you discuss what happened to you?  why don't you talk about your experience?
I:  was it that bad that you couldn't discuss it?
R:  you mean as in our story?
I: yes, why don't you talk about it with people with anyone?
R: Yes we do ,  we talk about our story, do you want me to?
I: We will continue our questions now and then we will ask about your experience and your  story, and if you want you can discuss it with us. 
R:ok
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash 	nakin,dengnakin)G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?ist?
Why haven't you discussed the experience with anyone? Do you feel like you cannot discuss it?  or did you like the people do not want to hear about it?
R:   I think everyone knows about us, sometimes we talk about it sometimes we don't
R:  you know, all the people know our story
I:  Yes I know,  I have already told her ( the interviewer)  that all the people know about your story.
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (	dengdikin)G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.haben.
I: I want to ask you about many options you might have used or discussed your experience with.you have friends here right?
R: yes
I: have you discussed it with your family and friends? 
R: My experience?
I:  yes with ISIS.
R: The  already know, they were all with me. 
I:  Have you spoken about your experience with a psychologist or counsellor?
R:  yes I have spoken with a psychologist
I:  so discussed your experience with him?
R:   yes they know
I:  Have you  spoken with a woman like Irena the social worker, the one that helps you. have you ever discussed your experience with her?
R:  she knows
I: Have you discussed your experience with Media  like, newspapers, television, interviews ?
R: Everyone talks about their experiences but I didn't
R:  they talk a lot but I don't.
I: a lawyer?
R: Back in Iraq when we started to go with the procedures
I:  no, I meant here, about your experience 
R: we had a trial Back in Iraq and we finished our procedures and brought  our things here
R:  we had a trial for three days
I:  what kind of trial?
R:  a trial that investigate our experience how we got caught and how  were we released, and about  our men, it included everything.
R: They provided us with our passports and then  sent us here.
I: Have you discussed your experience with the police ?
R: Here, no
I:   in Iraq?
R:  they were in the court, we talked about our entire experience from the minute we got caught till the minute we were released.
I: Have you ever discussed your experience on Facebook or Twitter?
R:  no not at all,   we feel shy about it, girls things and so on, you know.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe	 bejeG05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
x
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride	 bu?G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
x
IF LAWYERHeger parêzer	 be	Falls Rechtsanwalt Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami	/ international) bû?G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
x
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe	 bejeG07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
x
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem	 ?G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
xx
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere	 ?G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
x
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran	 girt?G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye	)Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem 	wan ?G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi	 ?G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte	 girt?G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab	 de nivîsî?G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Have you ever written about your experience on Facebook or Twitter in  a book  or on papers as in journals?
R:  we only talked about it in the court and they  wrote about it, they recorded our discussion word by word, they also sent emails.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we 	dikin?G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend	)?G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe	 bejeG17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye	 digerin?G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany how often have you sought information  about what is happening with the conflict with Isis back in Iraq?  how much do you want to understand the informations about this conflict,  do you want to know or you don't want to?
R:   general informations, I have no idea about it.  but when it comes to those who are held captive  or have been released or ran away  or got killed,I only know about these informations.
I: How open have you tried to  seek these informations,  is it everyday or sometimes or once in a while?
I: So is it like everyday you wanted to search for these informations, or is it once in a while, or let's say once a week, twice a week, every day, or is it always? 
R: Record those who stayed in Iraq or they call us and tell us about the situation and the updates about the people there, without those who Returned from captivity
I: Can we say like several times a month?
R:  sometimes it once a day,  sometimes every 2 days we ask about the updates. 
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan 	nagerin)?G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?nicht)?
I: Why do you seek information?  why do you want to know who got killed who was captured?
R: they talk about it ____
I: they, as in your men? family members?
R: my brother in law is still there, my husband had 2 other brothers, Isis took my husband and only the 2 brothers are left.
I: your husband
R: yes,he was taken by ISIS.
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê	 digerin?G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe	 bejeG21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na.
 G22:  how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan naG22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über 	 G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: the professor is wondering how do you  and your Yazidi community Communicate ? do you use phone calls? how do you communicate? through friends and family?
I: Do you use WhatsApp to communicate?
R:   sometimes I communicate with my Sister through WhatsApp and we talk about the kids
I:  do you text,  like a text messaging? 
R: yes as in texting
I:  phone calls?
R: yes i ask about them how they do,what are they doing?
I: do you use facebook or twitter?instagram?
R: i don't have instagram but sometimes i use faccebook,its not my facebook account,it belongs to my kids.
R: I always say I don't want one.
I: her mom is like that as well.
I: Do you use any other social media besides Facebook or instagram ?
R: i only use my phone for calls and text and that's enough  for me
I: Do you listen to the radio?
R:  sometimes
I:  do you watch TV?
R:  no,  only my kids do that
I:  they read the newspaper?
R:  sometimes I read the alphabets so I could make up a word in German, and I think about it too much. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe	 bejeG23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any 	ti	me or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
I: We will start now with the discussion about  your experience with isis,  we will ask you questions,  and if you may answer them that would be great
R:  you mean when I was held captive?
I:  yes,  but not immediately I will start with questions and then you can answer them if you want to. But khala, if you feel in any minutes that you do not want to answer,  or you feel uncomfortable with  this section you  can stop  at any time. ok?
R: It's alright,   I have one brother left, I talk to him.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity With Isis?
R: At 11:30, We were under Siege For 10 days, 13 days in the village, they always told us that if we run away nothing will happen to us and we always said its good if so,on the 3rd of august isis entered Shingal,At that time we couldn't run away so we stayed, on the 13th of August they captured us, or 15th of august.
R: I just called us with their weapon in their hand,  they  entered our houses, Got into the houses and asked us to go along with them.We prepared food to our children but our children did not eat because we had to get out ,We  packed our clothes and our slippers and we grabbed whatever was lying ahead for the children, Because we thought that if we went to a strange place we have a spare to change for the kids .They took us to an institution  it was like a school,  a big school with two or three  floors.
I: Did Isis tell you to get in that  building?
R: Yes,  they ordered us all to get into  the school building.
R:  then they told our men to go and bring the cars
I:  so your man told you to go and they will bring the cars?
R:  no,  Isis told our Men to go and bring the cars
I:  so the woman and you had to go into the building,  and your men had to stay outside.
R: yes
R: So we got into the school building and the men went outside to bring the cars 
R: They brought the cars and  parked them in the school backyard, every man was with a car  came from kocho.
I:  How?  sorry I couldn't understand
R:  every person with the car came from kocho village
I:  what is tarampel?
R: we say tarampel
I: is it the thing that pumps air into the tires?
R: tarampel
I: do you mean that they drove over your men?
R: they asked our men to bring their sayara (cars)
*clarification: the respondent meant that the men came and stood beside their cars but the word tarampel has a different definition in kurmanji Syrian dialect, it means (Air Pumper)
R:Our men brought the cars and parked them there .
I:  so they brought the cars and parked them there.
R: yes
R: And then  Isis asked for the keys
I: from your men?
R: Yes all the men gave up their keys
R:  then they asked for the mobiles
R:  they took the woman, the children, and the men's mobiles
R:  then they asked for the gold, the jewellery, and the money
R:we even gave up our children’s  Earrings, we took it off their  ears
R: Then they took us, the girls and the woman to the third floor, And they took the man and put them in the cars.
I: how long Have you stayed there? 8 months?
R: This is  all occurred when we were in kocho only.
R: This was a new school they have built,  our children used to attend it.
R: they  Took our men and then they took us to the third floor, women girls and children, there were many of them we were so afraid,And because you were so frightened and intimidated buy their weapons we ran to the third floor.
I: And after the experience in the school did you get out? where did you go after that?
R:  they took our men to a place and they didn't let us see them, they took us all and put us in a room  on the third floor, And they told us that you are not allowed to see them.  they took the men near to a place and killed them.And we  heard the gunshot.
R:  when we had the gun shot the woman started to scream that the men were killed.
I:  who said that?
R:  women, they said after hearing the gunshot “the men were killed”
I: then?
R:They killed the men
I:  yes but after that what happened to you?
R: We were on the third floor and the men were downstairs
I: then?
R: then, they said, Come to the cars.  they took the  men, all of them
I:   were they dead
R:  they took them and they killed them 
I: They took them and kill them.
R:  yes they killed them all around the village , They drag them out and put them all in the grave. 
I:  you were held captive for eight months, what happened to you?
R: 9 months and then ran away
I: how?
R: They put us in institution building in solakh
I: Or you run away,  what happened during these 8 months?
R:  I was held captive and waiting for salvation.
I: yes ,continue
R: They took us, they took the men, but they took us the women and the children to an institution in solakh 
I: in shingal
R: in shingal
I: which institute?
R: solakh
It's a big institution like this accommodation Centre.
R:  at night they separated the girls from us, the girls we say the girls, they took them to Mosul,syria and tal afar,  they took them for themselves.isis took them for themselves.
R:  after that they took the old woman too,  our children's grandmothers,  our men's mother's,  there were 50 years old,  60 years old they took them and killed them,They took them too and kill them. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê	 de man?VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: how long did you stay in captivity?
R: 9 months
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I:How did you manage to escape?
R:  I faced a lot of difficulties in my escape 
I: how?
R: i stayed in a jail in tal afar,They put us in a jail that was filled with children and women, Our situation was really  horrible,  the lack of food made us feel like we were going to starve to death,  they gave us only one piece of bread  ,we gave it all to our children. We didn't have enough water, sometimes our kids felt like they are going to die and suffocate because we didn't have enough water. They took us and put us in houses in tal afar,  these are the same houses that belong to people who ran away from them,We ran away from a house in tal afar, I managed to  escape with my children with  another family who weren't living far away from us,  they were only 15 minutes away. I kept on running night and day.
I:  where did you go?
R:   we ran away to a village  that was only 15 minutes away, I ran away at night, I went to that Village, I've put myself  between a family there.
I:  you mean like hiding?
R:  yes I  hid 
R: I hid my children  and I put some things on them as a way of hiding,  my children were always wearing some old and torn clothes,Especially the girls because we didn't want Isis to take them.
R: I was held captive for 9 months and I always stayed with the women,we all were women we stayed together, I didn't dare to live alone, because I was so afraid of Isis , And then we ran away as a family all together.  they released some of the hostages, men and old women, the men who were either sick or not in  healthy condition, Or they had some mental illness like crazy or retarded.
I: They released them?
R:  yes, I don't know how they did that,  but I have put myself among them because I wasn't feeling well, and my children were already with this family, and they were always wearing these ragged clothes, they really looked  retarded  because of their look and their clothes. so they released us, you know like when the woman is not in a perfect condition they used to release these type of women, so I was released and my children ran away with the other family from tal afar.
R: They said that the last Batch will be sent to Syria, They separated the girls  from us,  the little girls who are still virgin
R:  so they released the old woman and I was of them because I wasn't in a good condition more of a healthy one, I told them that I don't have man and I don't have any kids. 
*during the instant translation,the interpreter translated the word (released) to the word (left behind) according to the Syrian kurmanji dialect which led to a total different meaning of the sentence,so actually the older women were released by isis not left behind during the escape process.
R: And then my kids ran away with that family. 
I: you children?
R: they ran away along with the family.
R: before i was released,they took away my daughter,my brother in law took her.
*the instant interpretation was false,not sister in law 
R: i was so afraid that they take her to Syria, they took every batch of the hostages to syria and sold them or they would take them to mosul,i said “since my son is alone they will separate the girl as well”. they took the girl and said “we take the mothers of 4 or 5 kids and sell them to Syria, and because we were afraid we ran away.
I: what happened then khala?
R: they separated the girl i said they will take my daughter and my son.
I: and then what did you do?
R: then i came,and my son ran away with that family because he was so afraid.
R: Then they took my friends
I:  and their kids?
R:  yes
I:  and sold them to Syria?
R: yes
R: Then the people started to run away ------------------
I: what about your son?You said your son ran away with another family, how did you reunite with him?
R:  you ran away with the family, then he came.
I:  how did you see him  after that?
I:  he came to you?
R: yes,  I was there and then he came with the family and we met.
R: I was always afraid that they taken to Syria
R:  you wanted to get out of the danger zone of tal afar
I: You have two daughters and a son, so when you ran away,was your daughter with you, or your children?
R:  they were with me, I took them with me
R: They only separated the youngest. she was only three years old 
I:  so in total was it 8 months
R:  we actually entered the 9th month.
I: Not after you were held as a Captive by Isis, could you please tell me again briefly how did you manage to escape?
R:  they released us partly, Like An Exchange but I don't know why or how.
I:  oh,  so Isis released you.
R: in the northern area 
R: There was a badge of older women or retarded girls sick ones.
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna	we) bedilend?H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheit'szustand ausgewirkt?
I:How has the experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health? Do you feel like you're healthy? 
R:  its very good,im good
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheit'szustand aus?
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: the professor will state some options,we want to know if you are suffering any of these symptoms as an effect of the isis violence, its a medical question,i will tell you the symptoms and you need to evaluate them whether they are strong or middle or if you don't have the symptom at all,ok?
R: yes
R: what?
I: i will explain while asking the question so you could understand.
R: ok
I: From 1 to 4,  how much  did the Isis violence you experienced affected your current health? what I mean is,  how much did the violence you have experienced affected your well-being, as in your health, do you feel like your health has collapsed,  or improved, or stayed the same ?
R: When we were in prison, it was really bad, the women suffered each time we asked for food for their children
I: how bad?
R: really bad
I: like extreme?
R: yes
H04 PainH04 Êş (eshek	)H04 Schmerz
I: now,do you have any pain? in the meantime?
R:   pain?
I:  yes, are you experiencing pain in any part of your body?
R:  i have a backache and my legs are hurting me always,i feel like i can't walk
I:  how much of pain?
R:a lot
I: extreme?
R: yes
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyenH05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheit'sgefühle ohne körperliche	 Ursache)
I: Are you experiencing and abnormal Sensation?
R: sometimes
I: sometimes? how much?
R: sometimes i feel like choking, in my throat.
I: what about here?
*here: as the interpreter points to the respondent skin (arm area)
R: sometimes it itches 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Are you experiencing any problems with your back when you walk? from 0-4?
R: yes, a lot
I: extreme?
R:Extremely,  sometimes I can not walk.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfenH07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
R: i also have terrible headache
I: headache?
R: yes, extremely, always
I: are you experiencing any dizziness, like fainting?
R: i have this huge Pain in the back of my head
I:  how much
R:  extreme
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindkiH08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: are you experiencing any blurred vision? do you see well?
R:  yes, My eyes hurt because we cried a lot,  they just dried up.
I:How about your hearing?  are your ears ok?
R: My ears are not fine,  sometimes I can't hear well
I:  Which one?
R: both
I: both?
R: They should repeat each time someone talks so I could hear
I: So you don't hear well
I:  do you smell well?
R:  I have allergies, I don't smell well
I:  when you eat food,  do you taste it well, your tongue is ok?
R: they are fine
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs	) ta tang debeH09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel sometimes shortness of breath?
R: yes,sometimes short sometimes ok
I: how much? half half?
R: yes
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora	 we digereH10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Diffuse sometimes the sensation of Spinning Around?  dizziness?
R:  when I overthink about something, I feel like losing balance
I:  how much?2 or 3?
R: 2
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle	 ta desheH11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I:  do you feel sometimes your heart beat so fast?
R:  I have  pressure
I: how much?
R: i do have a high pressure.
I:  pressure?
R:  yes and sometimes my heart beats so fast
R:  sometimes it's beats fast sometimes it's normal
I:  so it's sometimes
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek	 eshekH12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I:  how about your stomach?
R:  I have a stomach ache
I:  how much? is it half half? or is it always?
R: half half
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad	)?H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I:Do you have any other symptoms?
R: i have pain in my (nawqa)
I: what does (nawqa) mean? where is its location?
R: here
I: kidney you mean
*nawqa is kurmanji shingali term for kidney
I:  beside the kidney, do you have any other symptoms?
R: i had polycystic ovary,i had an operation to remove it.
*the respondent literally said” i had a water bag on my ovary” which is a general,non medical term for polycystic ovary
I: In  general,how much do your kidneys hurt? from 0-4
R: Sometimes they hurt a lot, and sometimes it's normal. 
R: experiencing kidney pain is really hard.
I: How about this water back that you have,  do you feel it hurts sometimes?
R:  i had it removed with laser (ovarian laser treatment), I didn't know about it, the doctor told me.
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn	 bibêjinH14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş	 dijîn?H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje	 chine?H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe	? Heger heye?H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa	 dibînin?H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: The symptoms that you've talked about before,  do you think they occurred after you ran away ?like your back  pain and your legs?
R:  you know, before I was held captive I wasn't feeling well too, but it was sometimes.  after the experience of violence,It became worse, even our bones were broke .
*even our bones broke is a term to describe the amount of physical pain but it doesn't necessarily mean that they literally broke.
R: Because of anger and anxiety and being nervous the whole time and because of the horrible situation, I feel like we are psychologically ill,not feeling well mentally.
R: sometimes they hurt but not that much. We go to the doctor, and it's an easy symptom or curable we treat it.The stress sums it all up.
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health :H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit 	 H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?erklären?
I: now khala, I'll tell you some concepts  in explaining  the effects of the  Isis violence on your health  and you'll have to evaluate from 0 to 4 each one of them.  I will repeat the question for each option so you could understand more.
R: ok 
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel	)H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Psychological causes,  how much do you think the violence of Isis affected your psychological  health?a lot? how much do you feel the violence affected your strength psychologically from 0-4? half half?
R: half half
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek	, asbiH21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: the general pain you experience, do you think its your body reacting to isis violence? from 0-4
R: Before  being held Captive by Isis, i had general body pain and illness,  a person could go to the doctor in Iraq,  but after the captivity experience, the pain that we have in our body has decreased.
I:  so how much do you think  the violence of Isis has  caused you physical reactions? a lot or half half?
R:  half half 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi	)H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: do you feel like the violence you experienced is caused by bad ideas,do you think the negative ideas are the cause of the violence?
*in the yazidi belief,devil,supernatural influences or any negative forces are prevented to be discussed.
R: When a person thinks about  his story, it hurts. he thinks and calculates the incidents which lead to stress
I: how much from 0-4?
R: half 
R: half of our illness comes from it
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunahaH23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I:  do you think what happened is a punishment of god for Sins?  how much do you think so?
R:  how?
I:  violence that you experienced by Isis.
I: The violence that you experienced by Isis, how much do you think its related to Religious causes? How much do you believe so?
R:  they were very bad, because of their religion.
I: ok, but  how much do you think?
R: They asked us to pray  their prayers, they always asked us to do so. and they wanted us to convert to their religion, they said their religion is the best but i didn't want to leave my belief.
I: do you feel like muslims have harmed you? do you believe that isis have harmed you in the name of islam?
R: yes it all lead to this.
I: are you talking about this subject?
R: yes, they have harmed the yazidis in the name of religion.
I: how much do you feel that way? strongly? poorly? a lot?
R: a lot
I: extreme.
*the respondent didn't quite understand the concept of the question,she referred to the conflict in the name of religion more than concentrating on (the punishment of god) side,she discussed the causes of ISIS harm on the yazidis.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u miletekiri?H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How does the violence you experience affect your relationship with other people?are you still making friends ?communicating with people?are you still capable of making friends after what you've been through?do feel like you are psychologically comfortable to communicate or still restless?
 R: friends? never
I: yes,friends and people
R: how ? how for example?
I: you don't want to?
R: a companion?
I: friends, for example a woman
R: yes, and i have many of them here in the accommodation center
I: do you feel like you can communicate with them?  with friends?
I: So the violence you experienced did not affect your relationship with other people,  you can communicate and make friends.
R:  with women like me,  we go out and we sit and talk and feel comfortable together not alone.
I: How does your  experience of violence by Isis affect your relationship with your children? is it good?
R: It's very good
I:  can you explain furthermore please?
R:  my relationship with them is  great
I:  great?
R:  yes
I:  can you tell me more,  do you sit together? eat with each other? go out together?
R:They live with me,  they gave us two rooms.
I:  what about your relationship with the kids?  can you explain it?
R:  we eat together,  I ask them to take a bath, They're always with me. 
I: Can you explain your relationship with the yazidi women in this accommodation Centre?  I think the woman here all of them  are yazidis right?
R:  yeah they all are women that come from my village, from the same area, they all are my friends 
R: They were held captive too. when I spent my time with them I forget about my problems.
I: What do you do altogether every day?
R:  we go to school together,  we go to the supermarket together, other places. we are comfortable together
I:  do only have these woman in this accommodation Centre as friends,  or you have other friends in Germany?
R:  yes I do have friends but every one of us is located in different places. 
I: Do you have any other friends in the city?
R: yes
I: here in Stuttgart?
R: yes, yes
R: My brother-in-law's wife is here
I: can you explain the word (tia) in kurmanji
R: my husband’s brother, He managed to escape, he is in Iraq, his wife and his children are here, and me and my children are here
I: yes i got it
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?aus?
I:  did your experience of violence  buy ISAs affect your daily life, such as eating, or drinking,  after you  escaped and came here?  in daily life when you eat or drink,  do you feel like the violence you experienced affected your daily life ?
R: I actually feel pretty good because I got rid of them.
I: do you feel like you are still a yazidi woman in this yazidi  community? Do you still feel like you are one of them, one from this community 
R: yes
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (	bawari) we?H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?Glauben?
I: Do you feel that this experience of violence by Isis affect your faith as a yazidi ?
R: how?
I: As your faith in God, your belief.  did the experience affect your  Faith?  is your faith now stronger, weaker?
R: like before ,I still believe in God, i still have faith in god
R: i really am thankful that i managed to runaway with my children
I: thank god
R: a lot of people like me stayed and couldn't run, still in captivity
I: that's right.
R: a lot of newly wed women or women with kids couldn't escape and stayed there with their children.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your Yazidi faith?H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the 	effects you have described from the ISIS violence?H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen	 IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: how do you cope with the effects?  You have experienced a horrible situation and violence by Isis, how do you cope with the effects?
R:   I was really feeling good before but after my daughter’s death it broke me down because she is not with me.
I: and?
R: and i always say thank god the rest of 3 children are still with me.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I:are you taking any medications?treatment?
R: i went to iraq and came after 10 days, a week, i went for my daughter,when they told me about her.
I: when?
R: the same girl that died
I: no, i meant when did you go to iraq?
R: this month, the 8th
I: did you go to visit your family?
R: i went for my brother and my children’s uncle (brother in law), i went to see them
R: and they said” her daughter had died”
I: wh did you go?
R: i went for my belated daughter,i thought to myself i must go to see her and to see them too.
I: how long did you stay there?
R: a month almost
I: is this your first time you go to iraq after coming to germany?
R: two times.
I: were you scared when you went there for the first time?
R: iraq is no longer good
I: yes, but did you feel scared when you went for the first time?
R:in the northern area people were living in caravans,each one was living in a caravan 
I: how did you travel? an airplane?
R: yes
I: who supported you?who helped you so you could go?
R: the people from my village helped me.
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: i will give some options now,it's always from 0-4. 
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)H32  te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder	 Ihrer Familie)
I:how much do you believe in the strength of the yazidi people for your help,Do you feel like you became strong on your own or do you believe in collective strength,  like your friends? 
R: like how?
I:  do you believe in that?
R: all of my friends are like me,They are here with their children, some of them are still in captivity by Isis.
I: ok,  from 0 to 4 how much do you think this helps?
R: how for example?
I:  what I mean is, you're not on your own, they are always with you, helping you, supporting you.
R:  no I am never on my own they are always with me.
I:  not in the concept of being together under isis, what i mean is do you all stand with each other
R: yes they brought all the women like me here
I: yes, so how much?
R: extreme, they don't have anyone here anymore,we all have each other.
I: that's right.
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: believing in yourself, for example do you believe you are a strong woman, are you confident and strong by yourself?
R: i am very strong
I: yes you are.
H34 Praying	H34 limê	 kirinH34 Beten
I:  praying?
R: yes always
I: how much?
R: we always prayed for god to help us and deliver us.
R: its good
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeskiH35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Do you like spending time alone or you prefer spending time with people and friends?
R:  If I sit alone by myself, I overthink about stuff .
I: yeah people go crazy
R: yes, if i sit alone i go back to the place and time of the horrible experience,so i get busy, do anything.
I: So don't like spending time alone?
R:  it's not good to be alone,  one might over think about anything. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: How much do you try to avoid thinking about the experience?
R:  Sometimes I think about it then I tell myself it's time to get it out off my mind
I:  so,you throw it away
R: yes
I: how much
R: I wake up I think about it then I get busy trying to forget it
I:  does this mechanism help you?
R:  I think to myself “  let it go, get busy”
I:  how much?  is it half half
R: yes
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet	 (trauma) bikinH37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you like exchanging  and sharing the experience events with other people?
R: how?
I:  you and your friends,  you and  the women from the  yazidi community,  do you sit and talk and share about the experience you faced?
R: always
I; how much,a lot or half half
R: the conversation always leads us to the same point over and over, we always get back talking about it
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst	)H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: do you like going to a psychotherapist?do you want to visit a therapist?  does it help to go to a therapist?
R: i went twice or three times,it was really good
I: a lot? haf? normal?
R: half half , i went like 5-6 times
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der 	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: did it help living here among the yazidi women? to seek help within this community? did it make you become stronger?
R: in iraq?
I: no here
R: here, i didn't go anywhere,just the women who were the same who had been held captive and released these are my friends here, i didnt go.
I: im talking about the yazidi community here,the yazidi women and community,you all live together here,did this help you?
R: a lot, we are friends here and we used to be friends there
*there: iraq
R: we were all like this
I: yes i understand,we had the same situation in Syria
R: they took hostages and relocated us in different places,and we got back together again.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî	 din hebe.H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: do you have any other strategies that helped you here?beside the strategies i mentioned before? 
R: thats it.
I: do you have any other things on your mind you want to say?other things helped you?
R: i don't know, if you could do anything.
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe	 bibêjinH41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya	 we dike?H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe	 bibêjinH43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya	 we dike?H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one i	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya weproved your well-being.H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya weH45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereit's in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr 	 H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereit's in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)H46 îlaç (derman)H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Do you take any medication since you came from iraq?
R: i went to a doctor back in iraq
I: what about here? are you taking any medications?
R:i went to the doctor several times,and in iraq as well,i had many tests.
I:and here? do you take any medications?
R: no,only tests.
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi	)H47 Psychologen
I:  have you went to a psychologist? you said before you did right?
R: yes
I: did it help going to psychologist? how much?
R:We talk about our story and experience with Isis, about our life and children
I:  so it was good, it did help you
R:  yes
I:  a lot?
R:  yes it was very good
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya ŞexsîH48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Have you ever tried individual psychotherapy,  it means only you and the psychotherapist were there,a doctor,not necessarily,perhaps a person (therapist).Did that help you?  or you only went to a psychologist?
R:  I went to  both
I:  you didn't go to the other one?
R:  no I went to both of them. But I went to the doctor when he Operated on me. 
*the interpreter said no but the respondent answered yes for individual psychotherapy and referred to the doctor as the doctor who operated.
R: I went to the doctor five or six times for my back ache.
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya	 GrûpanH49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
I: Have you went to a group psychotherapy?  you know what does the group therapy mean? it's when the doctor and a group of people sit all together and discuss their issues.
R: yes
I: have you went?
R: no 
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: have you visited a spiritual religious or traditional healer as a Yazidi shekh?You know a traditional healer or the shekh help the people and their belief.
*shekh is similar to the Christian pastor but in both Islam and Yazidi is called shekh
I: do you know the meaning of the word shekh? the man who leads a pray and so
R: oh shekh you mean
I: yes
I: do the yazidis have one
R: yes we do have one too.
I: have you ever visited him to help you? to guide you.
R: i went to him back in iraq
I: what about here?
R: no
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati	)H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: How about herbal medicine like tea or chamomile tea? do you like that
R: yes i do,i like them a lot
I: did it help you,your health?
R: yes a lot
R: I used to take herbal medicine back in Iraq it was really good
R: they have it here too
I: where do you find it here?
R: in the super markets,the same as in iraq
I: which one do you drink?
R: we used to eat some black little seeds in iraq
*(nigella sativa) little black seeds, they are called the blissful seeds
R: I use it with milk and honey,  it's much better than medication 
I: how does it help? like for your Stomach?
R:  yes it helps with my stomach, And other things ---
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan	)H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: How about the social worker? i think you have A social worker here her name is irina, does she help you with your daily life, you help you with your children on a which school should they attend or in your daily life?
R:  They help us with our daily life,  we have irina and Sabrina And Louisa and ---- 
I:does it help
R: yes a lot
I: how much?
R: extreme
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Have you visited a doctor or physician?
R:  we  go to a doctor  and they send our children to school
I:  how much  did  it to help to go to a doctor or physician?
R:  how?
I:  how much did your doctor help,  from 0 to 4? how much did it help to improve your health
R:  it was  good
I:  wasn't very good was a normal good ? you can tell me your opinion
R: it was good
I: this?
R: yes
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 ToxteR:	  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe	 kir?H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe	 kir?H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe	 kir?H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe	 kir?H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional heale	R	: how much did it help?H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle HeileR: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe	 kir?H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe	 kir?H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might i	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?prove your well-being?H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote 	 H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?Wohlbefinden?
I: You said before that the social worker was doing a great job with you, could you please explain for me what did she do to improve your well-being?  I mean how did she Help?  by taking the kids to school? the woman from the social service, the one that you said that she helps you in your daily life and with your children.
R:  the social workers are always with us, you know they help us with everything.
I:  did they also help with the children and the school?
R:  yes they put the children in schools.
I:  and what about you?
R:  yes they found me a school too 
I: nice.
I: How about your psychologist? 
R:  yes a lot
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha	 we negirtîye?H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: In your opinion is there any professional help that you need,  beside the social worker, and your psychologist?  do you think you need any other help?
R:  I don't know,  like someone to help us?
I:  is there any professional help  you would like to receive?
R: If someone could do something good for us.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people someti	mes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYSH65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ deH65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: I'm going to mention a list of difficulties and I want to know if they occur to you in the last 7 days,ok?
R: ok 
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra	 weH66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: From 0 to 4,  any reminder 8 things happened in Iraq
R: I always remember,  things just pop into my head
I: is it  every day?
R:  I always remember, I don't think I will forget as long as I live.
R: I always remember
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu	)H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I:  do you have trouble staying asleep ?   do You sleep well?
R: sleep?
I: yes
I:do  You sleep well?
R : its good
I: 0-4?
R: half
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wêH68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Other things maybe think about what happened in Iraq? 
R: I just think perhaps someday the world will get better
I: how much?
R : We have a lot of hope 
I: extremely
R: extremely
*i think the woman did not answer the main question,she referred to extremely option about how much hope she has that the world will get better someday
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs	 kirH69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: During this week,  have you felt angry and irritable?
R: yeah sometimes it happens,i get angry fast.
I: sometimes
R: yes half half
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr	 xist.H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: do You try avoiding getting yourself upset when you think about it, do you try to run away from it,  to try to run away from the thoughts or any reminders of that violence you experience by Isis ? do You do that?
R: how?
I:  do you try avoiding thinking about it,0-4, to try avoiding the  thought of it ?
R; I always try not to think about it
R:   half half,we try to forget about it.
*the question was explained correctly the first time,but in the second attempt,the interpreter forgot to mention avoiding letting myself get upset part.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na	 dexastH71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Sometimes you think about it but you didn't mean to.
R:  yes sometimes I say I don't want   to think
I:  how much? is it always like that or is it half half?
R: half 
R: they all are half half
I: yeah
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast	 bûH72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: khala, Do you think sometimes that what happened wasn't real, that what happened was like a dream.
R:  yes right sometimes you say it was like a dream it wasn't real.
I:  how much do you think so?
R:  a lot, we say at that moment it was a dream and then woke up and it's gone.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you feel like you stay away from any reminders of what happened back in Iraq.do  you feel that way?  how much do you run away from those  reminders?
R:  I feel restless when I think about it.
I:  how much do you think
R: how much? i don't understand
I:  when you think about your experience, you  face some bad feelings about it, how much do you think you  try to run away from these reminders ?
R: never --
I:you dont think about it? or you do?
R: i dont mean to think about it
I: exactly,how much do you try to stay away from it?
R: a lot
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 surete ten sari taH74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: pictures about it appear in your mind.
R: yes, a lot,especially the image of my man
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav	 tirsêH75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: do you get easily startled?
R: yeah, i get jumpy in places
I: how much?
R: most of the time at night.
I: is it half half?
R: yes
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim	.H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: how much do you try not to think about it?
R: i try too hard to not think about it.
R: but no matter how hard we try, its always in our head,our head is filled with it
I: i know its hard.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: when you think about it, you experience tons of emotions because of what you've been through,at the same time you try not to think about these feelings. how much do you try so?
R: if a person had control over it he wouldn't think about it at all.
I: so, how much? 3 or 4
R: 3
I: is 3 enough?
R: i don't know, but i'll say 3.
I: 4 is the highest
R: then 4
I: 4?
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder	)H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: you had numb feelings about it. i am talking about the last seven days,have you ever experienced this?
R: yes,you mean when i remember it?
I: yes
R: i always remember it.
I: yes,but do you feel the numbness?
R: yes, it’s the same feeling when you see a nightmare
I: yes
R: sometimes like a nightmare.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt	 sei.
I: do you find yourself acting like you were back at that time?
R: yes
I: do you feel that way?do you feel that way when you think about it,its like you are back to that place, that situation.
R: yes
I: how much do you feel that way?
R: half
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs	 kir.H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Have you had troubles falling asleep in the last 7 days? you can't sleep well,  in the last 7 days
R:  sometimes I have troubles falling asleep
I:  how much? in the last 7 days. was it extreme or moderate or none
R:  sometimes, half 
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe	 weH81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: And in the last seven days, have you had waves of strong feelings about it,  it's like the waves of the sea.
R: yes i do feel like this,I feel like my body is heavy.
I:  I understand but it's not about your body it's about your  thoughts,  have you thought like this in the last 7 days. 
R: yes i did
I: how much?
R: extremely 
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim	.H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: You want to try to remove it from your memory.
R:  yes I try so hard, but I can't remove it, sometimes I say a lot of people have been through what we have  been. 
I: So have you tried to do so? how much?
R:  I try.. extremely
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs	 kir.H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: khala, Do you know the meaning of concentrating?
R:  concentrating?
I:  it's when you try to concentrate with your senses and your brain on  a specific thing. they say you concentrate.  have you experienced any problems with concentrating in the last 7 days?
R: I have problems, I think about the daughter.
I:  yes I understand but in the last seven days,  how much of problems with concentrating did you  experience?
R:  extreme,  it's because I'm not mentally comfortable.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat	 lekatH84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: When you think about the violence of Isis and your experience, do you experience any physical reactions,  like sweating, shaking, heart pounding?
R:  because I am mentally not comfortable,  I experienced heart pounding.
I: your heart beats fast?
R: I feel restless and I don't have the energy to stay in one place, ---
I: How much do you experience this?
R:  a lot of times.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan	 dît.H85 Ich träumte davon.
I:  have you ever experienced nightmares about it.
R: yes i do have nightmares about it.
I: i meant in the last 7 days.
R: no
*should have been the word dreams instead of nightmares
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs	 kir.H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: You feel  watchful and on guard.
R:  yes I do,  and nervous as well
I:  how much?
R:  sometimes I feel like choking myself Because of the sadness im experiencing,And sometimes I'm normal.
I: how much,half half?
R: sometimes
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim	.H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Do you try not to talk about it?
R:  yes I do. I want to not talk about it
I:  how much?
R: i --- that i was sad and tired and this happened to me.
I: so half half?
R: half half
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive	 we datH88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi	 ne?H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Can you please tell me what was the most positive experience you had in Germany?
R: what?
I:  the most positive experience, the most beautiful positive experience you had here in Germany, what was it?
R:  with me
I: yes
R:  I say, it's good that my children are here living  a good life, it's  great that we came here, with three children I am very comfortable here.
R: Because we came here I am very happy about raising  my children here, I don't think I could  raise them there. 
*xodan: has 2 definitions,1- family, 2- raising. the interpreter used the first one which is wrong.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: You're aware of the program that brought you here from Iraq right? do you know this?
R: yes, They brought us here, me and my children.
I:  exactly
I:  how satisfied are you with this project?  a lot,  none?
R:  I am very happy and satisfied
I:  extremely?
R:  extremely.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte	 special Quota?H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: What are the three most positive aspects of the project? the  the three most positive aspects you liked in your opinion? 
R: This place is very good for us.
I: and?
R: -------------------
I: im sorry i couldn't understand,could you say it again.
R: We hope the return of our people who are  still being held as hostages by Isis.
I: what does (iqsir) mean?
R: our men who are in captivity
I: and?
R: and we hope the best for the world.
I: we are almost done.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Are there any negative aspects that you are not satisfied with? in this program
R: I am very satisfied and thankful.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel	)?H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I:  do you know the word hope, what gives you hope for the future?
R:  My Hope..
I:  what gives you hope for the future, what gives you hope that the coming days will be better?
R: I just have her that the future will be beautiful
I:  where do you get this hope from?
R:  we have been through horrible things. 
I: thank you very much,we are done now,and we thank you for coming,i know it was a bit hard because of our dialects but its kurdish after all.
R: in case i didn't know the answer its because of the dialect
I: no worries,it's just a questionnaire,we wanted to know about your opinion,there is no right or wrong answer.
I: do you have any questions for us?
R: the woman who came before me was my cousin,her brother is still in captivity.
I: where?
R: by isis in iraq
I: may god be with him and help him
R: i just hope if you could do something about it
R: just for the children.
I: this team doesn't know,they only came for the questionnaire and do a research about the yazidi women and their situation,did you understand me?
R: yes
I:  we hope (in god’s will) that perhaps later they try for another project similar to this which brought you all here but for now they have no idea about anything.
R: we will wait for god.
I: we thank you very much
I: have you started searching for a place to stay like an apartment?
R: no, i still live here in the accommodation center.they gave us 2 rooms where i and my children live in.
I: thank you so much.