Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [009]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R: I'm 33 years old.
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married or not?
R: Yes
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
I: Where is your spouse?
R: He was in Iraq, he went to Turkey and he will come here.
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: How many people liv here?
R: Me and my four children.
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Can you read and write in a language?
R: No, I don't know. I have never been to a school in my life.
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Have you ever been to school?
R: In Iraq?
I: Yes
R: I have never been to school.
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Are you currenly in school?
R: Yes, I go to school now. A teacher comes teaches us.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you employed, do you workc?
R: No, my children are small, so no. 
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: You don't want to work now. Working is difficult for you now?
R: Yes. It is difficult. 
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before Isis did you work?
R: No, we just did our own work.
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I:What is your religious faith?
R:Yazidi
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24  How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I:What is your ethich group? I mean are you Kurdish, are you Turkish?
R:Kurdish
I:Kurdish?
R:Yes.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I:Thank you for your answers. We want to talk about your future now.
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I:What are your priorities and concerns in life beginning from now?
R: A lot. My children are captured by Isis. I can't concentrate on anything. For example now if I want to go to the school I can't find the way. 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I:What is important for you now to say that you want to rebuild a life for yourself?
R:Life is not important for me. My child and family members are captured by Isis. I feel like I don't live in this world. I go to the street into the city I don't  know where I'm going. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I:We are going to ask  you some questions and you can answer as a little,  a lot, not a lot. You understand what I mean? I will ask some questions and you will asnwer as a little, a lot , quite a little, you will show me.  -  Do you have control on your life? You can show me here. Did you understand? You didn't understand it?
R: No.
I: You said you feel like you are not conscious. Do you believe that you have all control on your life? Do you have control on your life or no?
R: I think if my husband were here together with us, her children it would improve little by little. 
I: How much your life is under your control? A lot, a little, quite a little?
R: Quite a little.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think of the future? You think it is going to be better or worse?
R: If we can get together we will then have a good life. 
I: You want all of them get together here, in this country?
R: Yes.
I: How many people from your family are captured by Isis?
R: My father and my two uncles. One of my uncles with his five daughters, two sons and wife. And my other uncle with his son, and my father. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation improves in Iraq, and you could stay there, where would you choose to live? In Iraq, in Kurdistan or in Iraq, where would you want to live?
R: Now my elder son is captived by Isis, now I don't even want to go to Iraq. I can't. 
I: Even if your son comes?
R: If he can't escape we can't return (to Iraq). 
I: How old is your son?
R: 16
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel like Germany is your country?
R: We feel like we are going to be better here. We are going to get rid of Arabs here. 
I: How much?
R: This.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: Can you say how has your last years been here in Germany?
R: It was very difficult. In the beginning it was difficult. We got used to it now. 
I: Can you tell me how much? For example it was very difficult, a little difficult, or quite a little, half? 
R: Quite a little.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Can you explain why you answered so. Why did you say that here is very good?
R: We are not afraid of anything here. My children are in peace here, they can go to school, can go to the Kindergarten, we are in peace. But it is not like that in Iraq. Whenever I sleep I see  Isis in my dreams. They are always in my mind. We are always scared. Now, when walking on the street we come across an Arab men I fear that the same things are going to happen to us.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If one day you return to Iraq what do you think you need there so that you can have a life there? In Kurdistan region or in Sinjar region in Iraq. What do you think is needed?
R: If they accept the Genocide and we have more rights we want to go our homeland. 
I: So now you think Iraq did't accept what happened to you? Is your idea so ? I mean the Iraqi government hasn't accepted yet the violence you experienced? Do you understand what I mean? You said they wrote a Genocide, what did you mean by that? If the Government there said yes, these people should have more rights, why Genocide, can you explain? - Now you said a Genocide happened there.
R: Now for example if here belongs to me and a Genocide happens, and then we can return to our homeland again. 
I: But who did the Genocide? The Iraqi government, the Kurdistan government, the other countries? Who?
R: If all countries, America, Germany, Europea, if all countries could attack they will make it. 
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: What does justice mean to you? Rights I mean? Now when I ask you what are your rights what do you understand?
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: Is it important for you to get yur rights after what you experienced? It was something very difficult. They did a lot of violence. How much important is it for you to get your rights again?
R: We would like to return for example iraq was better than here.
I: But how much is it important for you? A lot, a little?
R: It is very important that Iraq improves again and we go our homes, lands and stay there together like in the past. 
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: How important is it for you, do you believe, do you have hope that you 'll get justice again?
R: My hope, I'm always scared. Now in Iraq something happens I don't believe in that. 
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it for you that the people who did violence to innocent people without a reason, that they be punsihed?
R: A lot important. 
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Can you explain why it is importatnt for you?
R: It is very important. They came and took our children we hoped that they will be grown up one day, so it is very important for us. 
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who is responsible for this?
R: The Muslims, not all Muslims, the Sunnites, not all Sunnites. 
I: If these people are going to be punsihed, is there any difference for you if they are The isis or their commander? There were small ranked and big ranked Isis. Is there difference for you?
R: No, their head, Ebubekir El Bagdadi, he did all. He is the head of Isis. He brought Isis to Iraq. 
I: So is not important for you that the other Isis members be punished?
R: Yes, it is important. I would like them to be burned in front of my eyes, but the head of them is more important. 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
 I: How should they be punished?
R: If I could reach them I would chop them with a knife. Like they did to our children i would do the same, I would chop them with a knife. - They did a lot to us. There is nothing that we didn't experience.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: If one day they are judged, where should they be judged? In the other countries? Or Iraq itself should judge them? Who should do this?
R: It is important that all the countries deal with it. The European Countries. Iraq won't do anything. 
I: Are aware that someone are tryin to put them on the trials, to judge them?
R: I haven't heard that. It has been three years no one did anything. 
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
I: 
R: 
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Do you believe that you can forgive the ones responsible for the violence?
R: No, never.
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: What should happen so that you can forgive them? 
R: I can never forgive it.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you to learn what is happening in Isis now.? Are they killing them or not? Hwo much is it important? Is the Isis succesful?
R: Killing them is very important for us. They are falling down day by day. 
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it for you that the world learn about what happened to the Yazidis?
R: It is important that people learn, we have been in this situation since three years. No one did anything for us. But Germany did. They brought us here and they are taking care of our children. 
I:Can you say how much important it is?
R: It is very important.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is that for you that the future generation know about what happened to you? 
R: It is important, I tell to my children to never forget this.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Can you tell us why you don't want this to be forgotten?
R: This is a massacre. There has been massacres before. But they didn't kill children, didn't took the girls. But in this massacre they killed children, took girls, destroyed our homes. 
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What should be done so that this massacre not to be forgotten?
R: It is important that you write everwhere, to distribute this story so that it not be forgotten.
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you heard about the Truth Commission before?
R:No
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: This truth commission is like a group commission. The governments establish them. So they investigate what Isis did or didn't do. They write them down, because what they write down are going to go the court one day. They will say here the Isis killed men, raped women, killed children. so it will bring punishment to them. Is that important for you that they do it?
R: Yes it is important for us that they collect these information, that people know about it but Isis is in Kurdistan, so there are Isis in the camps, they put them in the camps. 
I: So you say they are in the Yazidi camps or in some other camps?
R:  No, not Yazidi samps. they made some other camps for them. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I:  You know what victim is. Someone who is faced to violence. It's like a victim. You know who a victim is? Someone who is face with violence. How important is it that we help the ones who had been captured by Isis? You didn't understand? - What is needed to do for the vistims of Isis?
R: Someone like me?
I: Someone like you, someone in Iraq, in Germany, the people who escaped from Isis. What is needed for them?
R: We came Germany. Germany is very good for us. But the social works, it is not as they mentioned to us. They told us that they give big importance to the ones escaped from Isis  but it is not like they told us. They didn't do much. It is not Geremany's fault. it is the social works's fault. 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: What should be done for the Yazidis? - The things you said before like to write about them, what should be done for them?
R: Yazidi should get over this. They should do good things for them. We all return to our homeland. xxx.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Do you see yourself as a victim, someone captured by Isis before? How do you see yourself? Were you captured by Isis before or not? How do you see yourself? 
R: Now, here?
I:Yes
R: A good life.
I: Not just now. Isis did violence to you. Do you see yourself as a victim? Do you know what victim is ? - Isis did so violence to you. You have been under cruelty. So, do you see yourself so or not? They did violence to you. 
R: The Isis?
I: Yes. - Do you see yourself as broken or not? This is my question.
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
I: We would like to ask some questions about Iraq to you. 
R: Ok.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: In your opinion will there be peace in Iraq? Do you know what peace is? No? Like something done there so that there won't be war there. 
R: I don't believe that it will be as good as before so that we can return. I don't believe. - All they Yazidis are scattered. 
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: do you believe that in the Arab countries the war will one day end or not?
R: I don't believe. They did so much to us that I don't believe in anything. 
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: Don't you beleive that Iraq will be in peace one day?
R: I do not believe. They say it is going to get better. But I never believe that. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: The countries who attack Isis so that to defeat Isis, do you think they will be sucessful, so Isis will go from Iraq?
R: From Iraq?
I: Yes. What do you think?
R: If America attacks they will be defeated. - The Isis fighters captured are not from Iraq, they are from other countries.
I: Do you think the other countries support Isis?
R: I don't believe that they help Isis. They are cruel people. The Christian countries don't help them but the Arab countries help them. Like Lebanon, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, The Arab Emirates. All help them. 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What should be done to protect the other people who had massacre and the Yazidis, what should be done so they won't experience this any other time? What is important should be done? 
R: It is important they have a genocide. When the other countries dealt with it it become somewhat stable. As long as the Arabs are there it will not be stable. It is not possible in an Arab country. 
I: The other countries should help so that these people stay in Iraq or to move to other countries?
R: Yazidis, if the other countries help them they all will move from Iraq. They say we can't live with Arabs. Me, myself our neigbour village was an Arab village. We didn't have a school. We were children and we were afraid to go to their school. The cars, they would put one hundred people on the road, and crush them. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
I: We want to talk about you now. we want to learn what you experienced when you were captured by Isis. We want to ask questions about it. And if you don't want to talk you can say you don't want, it is difficult fo me.
R: Ok.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany how often have you discussed about your story? A lot, a little?
R:  A lot. 
I: Do you talk about it everyday.
R: Yes everyday. When we sit we always talk about it. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: 
R: 
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Now I'll read some options to you and you 'll say if you talked to them or not. She'll say some people to learn if you talked to them or not. 
R: Ok.
I: Did you talk your story to your friends?
R: Yes
I: Doctors?
R: Yes
I: Social Workers?
R: Yes.
I: Did you talk to anyone from the Tv. From the newspapers and etc. 
R: No.
I: Lawyer?
R: No.
I: Police?
R: In Iraq. 
I: Do you have facebook, do you sometimes share your story on facebook so that other people hear about it?
R: I don't have facebook. There are Isis there. I'm afraid to look at them. 
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
I: Any other people that you talk to, are there any other people that you talk your story with? Or it is just these people?
R: In Iraq there were people who came and talked to us always but no one did anything for us. Since we came here we didn't see anyone else. Just you came now. No one else came to talk us. 
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
I: 
R: 
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
I: Did you speak to the police in Iraq?
R: Yes.
I: Did they came to see you or did you go to them?
R: We went. Sometimes they came. Sometimes we were tired of them and say you do nothing for us, so why do you come and talk to us? 
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
I: Did you understand what they did with the information you shared with them, did you understand? All the things you shared with them what did they do with them? 
R: They didn't do anything for us until we came here. They would come, write. They would fill a notebook writing, they said we are going call you back, but we haven't seen anyone so far. 
I: So they didn't call you and talk to you?
R: Never. 
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Since tou came to Germany how often have your written your story, or you shared on facebook or in a book  or you didn't do such a thing? You didn't write your story right? In a book or somewhere, in a newspaper? 
R: In Iraw we wrote the Genocide, there was trial on Genocide, they said we are going to send to Germany. - Dr Nacham wrote this all down. He wrote it down so that you don't lose your rights.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
I: 
R:
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
I: Now I' going to read some options to you and you will say if you have written your story here or not, ok? - Have you written an Sms on your story?
R: No.
I: Twitter?
R: No.
I: Facebook?
R: No.
I: Whatsapp?
R: Yes.
I: That's whatsapp right?You sometimes send texts on whatsapp to your family? 
R: Yes.
I: Skype? Do you know what skype is?
R: Viber.
I: You said you don't have email?
R: No.
I: Do you write sometimes on your own. No you don't know how to write, right?
R: No.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany how often do you folow the news to learn what is happening with Isis? You know what news is?
R: News?
I: Yes, do you watch news to learn about what is happening with them?
R: I always follow the news. 
I: How much?
R: I'm always looking for news about my husband and captives. Day and night, when they say the news are good, i just watch my mobile. I say now someone will call me say something about my son. 
I: Where do you look for the news? Who tells you? - I'll read you some options you'll tell me if they shared the news with you or not. - You friends?
R: Yes. My brother, my sister.
I: Internet?
R: Yes
I: Do you follow internet to learn about it? - You  don't go on the internet, right, sister? You don't know the internet?
R: No.
I: Radio? Do you hear news from the radio?
R: The people in Iraq tell me.
I: Tv? Do you watch TV?
R: No
I: Newspaper?
R: No, not newspaper also. - You know our social workers don't allow us to learn about things. They say you'll feel bad. 
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: You and the other Yazidi people how do you communicate? I'll read some options to you and then you 'll say Yes, or no. - If there are news about Yazidis, do your friends tell you about it?
R: Yes.
I: Whatsapp?
R: Yes.
I: Sms you don't know writing, right?
R: No
I: Telephone?
R: Yes.
I: Like facebook and similar thing? You don't get news or you and the Yazidi family you don't talk there, right?
R: No. 
I:  Radio?
R: No
I:  Tv?
R: No.
I: Newspaper?
R: No.
I: Any other?
R: No
I: Do you talk to any other ones, not just your Yazidi family, do you talk to other people?
R: Yes. - For example the people who brought us here, we talk on whatsapp to each other. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
I: We have some more qustions for you. We want to ask you some questions about the time you spent in captivity of Isis, the time they hurt you and if they are difficult for you you can say they are hard for me. 
R: Ok. 
I: If you feel that you don't want to answer the questions tell us we will finish the interview. - If it is difficult for you tll us that you don't want to answer. 
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: What can you tell us the time you spent in the captivity of Isis. What have you seen? How many months? You can tell a few words.
R: I was there for 9 months. 
I: Anything else.
R: They captured me my husband with my five children. - They caught us in the mountain, they brought us to Sinjar, we were in the prisons for a month. - Then they put men in a prison and women in another one. We, the women were in the prison Badoş. - They asked us who wants to convert to Islam and the men my husband accepted,  they put us in a house of Shia. 
I: In Sinjar?
R: No, Tal Afar. - We were together in that house for nine months. They took us to Mosul the other month. - Then they took us to Tal Afar again. they took us to a vineyard house.There were sheeps. They told us to do their works. We dug the side of the trees. Some people bred the sheeps. - They took my son one day. - My daughter was a smaal child not old. I cut her hair with hair device, so she looked liked a boy so that they won't take her. - Nine months and then we ran away from Tal Afar to Kurdistan.  
I: How did you escape?
R: They called us, we had a stolen mobile with us.  We talked to the Peshmerga and they told "you will come from here and here and we will meet you there".
I: You with your four children?
R: Yes and my husband. 
I: Anything else you want to talk about?
R: It is just this, what I saw. They didn't take me, my husband was always with me. The family was together. The one who their husbands weren't with them, they with themselves. My husband was always with me. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I:  
R: 
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I:
R:
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: The violences you experienced can you say gave harm to you, caused any ilnesses, how did it changed your life? On your health, like you have more headache, you want to sleep more, how much harmful it is for you?
R: In the prison of Badoş they gave us medicines so we always slept. So they we won't think anything, about the family. All of us always slept. 
I: And does the violence you experienced affects you now? Like, do they hit you?
R: No, they didn't hit me. They were our enemies but they didn't hit us. Because my husband was with me. I was with the family. xxx They took my older child and the middle child. I got the middle child back but they took the old one and I never saw him again. 
I: And are you ok now, you have no pain?
R: No, I have pain in my shoulder and my chest. I saw the doctor. He said it is because of thinking. He said because you think a lot it hurts. 
I:  You have been in captivity for nine months, did it change your health or not? Is your body like before or not?
R: No, it is not like before. I had many harms.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: You had harms while you were in captivity. Is that a lot, a little, quite a bit?
R: It is a lot. - Sometimes I prepare dishes for the children, I feel so bad, so depressed. I feel so bad that I need one of the members of my family call me to talk to me. I feel so bad. 
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now we are going to tell you some sypmtoms and you can say if you have these symptoms after you were in captivity of isis? You'll say a lo, a little.
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: Do you have pain in your body?
R: Yes, I have pain in my shoulders. 
I: A lot?
R: Yes.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you have numbness in your body? You hands become numb, you legs become numb? Sometimes you can't feel your body? Do you have these sypmtoms? 
R: Yes.
I: A lot, a little?
R: A little bit. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Is it difficult for you to walk, to stand up?
R: Yes, sometimes I don't want. I want to stay in bed all day. I don't want anyone to see me and I don't want to see anyone.  
I: How much?
R: This.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Sometimes do you feel fainting? You know sometimes some people like they faint but they are not aware. Do you have such a symptom or not?
R: No, I don't. 
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Do you see well, hear well, smell well, are these better than before or the same? After your captivity in Isis are these things worse in you?
R: Yes, they are worse. Before the Isis I  didn't have any pain. 
I: And in your eyes? Can you hear well, see well? 
R: Yes, my ears are fine.
I: And your nose? You can breath well? 
R: No, when I walk I need to sit for a while. When I go to a market I have difficulty. They took me to the doctor the doctor said you are ok. It is because of worrying and thinking.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: When you feel bad do you feel like you feel suffocation? 
R:Yes.
I: A lot, a little?
R: This.
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you feel dizziness?
R: No.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Do you have pain in your hearth?
R: No, but I have pain here. 
I: Here? Why?
R: Yes, I don't know, they took me to the doctor he said it is because of worrying and thinking.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Sometimes do you feel nausea or you have stomachache? You have pain in your stomach? Do you have such a thing? 
R: No
I: Never?
R: Yes
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I: Do you have any other sypmtoms, ilnesses? Or somewhere else hurts that we didn't say? You said you have xxx or something similar?
R: No. 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
I: How do you feel now? So Isis had some violence, so how do you feel now? Can you expailn why this happened to you? I mean why you had this harms? Is it because of you psychology?
R: I have pain. We were in captivity of Isis, we experienced violence from Isis and half of us are captured still, and I think of them always so I have pain. 
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: We are going to read some information. And for you to get better how much are these things important that we do them for you? So, is it very important? A little? It doesn't give me any benefit? Did you understand what I mean? You didn't understand? 
R: No.
I: You are not feeling well now, so the things you experienced in Isis, we are going to read something for you and you will say if this thing is going to help you or not. OK? You will say this thing is useful for me or not useful for me. We will read you these things and you will say yes or no. 
R: Ok.
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Is it because of your psychology that you have these? Because you were captured by Isis? A little, a lot? 
R: Extremely. 
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Because Isis hit you a lot do you think that's why your health is bad? You know Isis hit you or they harmed you. 
R: It is because of my son. I forgot all the other pain I had. 
I: xxx
R: For me no. It is all because of my son. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: Sometimes do you think that, you say because I had a lot of sins that's why I experienced this? Do you think so? Do you think s lot or? 
R: I think a lot.
I: Do you say that I had a lot of sins? 
R: Yes, I do.
I: How much? 
R: Extremely.
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you believe that God caused it? I mean, God didn't like us so he did this? Do you say such things sometimes?
R: Sometimes we say: "My God, what have we done that you did this to us?" 
I: Do you say a lot, how much do you say?
R: I say a lot. 
I: Extremely?
R: Yes, everyday.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: After all the things you experienced you and other people how do you talk to each other, is it difficult for you to have friendship with them ? Do you always think on this that you can't do any other work for yourself? 
R: I always think of this. When sometimes I visit my friends I forget for a while. When I return home it is like before. 
I: Before and after you were captured by Isis, did your attitudes change or the same? How do you talk to your children, in the past how did you used to talk? How do you talk to your father and mother. You have good relationship with them? Do you feel bad when they talk? Did your behaviours changed or  not?
R: I changed. I became very restless. 
I: And to your children?
R: Sometimes I become very angry with my children. I'm restless already so I become angry to them. 
I: You become angrier because of the naughtiness of the children?
	R: I'm already very angry .When I'm thinking of the Isis and my son sho is captured I become angry like a mad. 
I: How do you talk to the children who are here?
R: The ones who are here? I'm ok with them. - They know my mood so they understand me. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: You experienced violence from Isis. How does the Yazidi community accpet you? Do they accept you or not? 
R: Yes they accept us like before.
I: The the Yazidi community don't say like they don't accept you os something like that?
R: No, they give utmost respect to us. - The Yazidis who escaped from Isis are shown more respect than the Yazidis who were not captured by Isis. - Isis told us when you go your communty is going to kill you. They will tell you that you converted to Islam. - Some of our girls were afraid. The Isis told them that their communty  is going to kill them. They didn't have phone to talk to their family. Baba Şeykh said that: "We will have utmost respect for them". 
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: 
R:
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: The things you experienced, your story, did it change your faith or your Yazidi faith is stronger? 
R: No, my faith never lessens, it became stronger not weaker. 
I: So did it affect your belief, is it like before, or changed a little? Your faith become weaker or stronger?
R: No, I didn't get away from my faith. It became stronger. 
I: Which one, red, green? This or this or this?
R: Green. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: You knowthe violence from Isis, you are broken from that now. When you feel restless or you don't feel healthy what do you do so that you feel better? 
R: Me? - I can't feel better. When I feel restless, bad, I go out, say my friends to always stay with me. 
I: Antyhing else?
R: We go to the market. Get busy with clothes. Sometimes we go in the afternoon until the evening until they day is over so that we can forget the things. We get busy with the children. 
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: When you have pain in your hand, your hearth feel bad, what do you do so that you feel better? Do you take medicines or..? 
R: Because of the pain in my shoulders I see the doctor in Iraq. They took us to the doctor but he doesn't give us medicines.. They sayit is bad. - We are used to the way in Iraq, the doctors give medicines there. so we are used to that and when here these don't give medicines we feel we won't feel well. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now we are going to ask you something again and you will say this thing helps you or not. 
R: Ok.
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Do you beleive that the Yazidi ccommunity or your family helps you to cope with this thing? Soes that give you strenght? You know what strenght is right? It means to.- Your community do they help you so that you get strong, get strong meand you can live the life by yourself. Do they help you or not?
R: Yes.
I: A lot? 
R: They help me a lot. Tell me a lot. They tell me forget what happened, that life is beautiful I say I'm not going to forget. 
I: Do they help you or not?
R: Yes, they help me a lot. 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you beleive in yourself that you can cope with this thing ?Do you have so much power to do that?
R: I say I'm going to get over. My husband is in Turkey now. When we come together we are going to forget everything. I believe, if we come together. 
I: Do you believe in yourself that you can cope with this? 
R: Yes.
I: How much ? A lot? A little?
R: A little.
I: This?
R:Yes.
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I:  Do you pray? Do you pray Yazidi stories (qewl)  so that you feel better? Do you say when I say these stories I'm going to feel better? 
R: I don't know to say stories. 
I: No?
R: No.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: When you feel bad, is it better or worse for you to stay alone? 
R: It is worse. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Sometimes when someone thinks or nothing but then they remember the things in the past. I mean when you go out see someone looking like Isis you remember them. Do you avoid to see to go those places, you say don't want to rememeber those things again? 
R: Yes, I avoid. When I go and see a bearded one. Now German also have beard. I feel like they are Isis when I see some people with beard. 
I: How much, do you want to see these things or not?
R: No, I avoid them. A lot. 
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you talk about your experiences of Isis violence with the others, with the women here?
R: Yes.
I: A lot? A little, quite a bit? 
R: Yes, I just go and sit with them. I go to the school the teacher comes and when the teacher takes a break we just talk about it. 
I: You think it is better or worse when you talk to others? 
R: It is bad but we talk. We can't help talking about it. 
I: Is it useful when you talk about it?
R: We always talk about our children. We say that they did this to us, they caught us here and here and we ran away from our houses but we were happy in our houses. 
I: Do you feel better or worse when you talk about it to your friends? 
R: No, I feel worse but I can't stay quiet.  
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Do you think that psychologist can help you so that you become better?
R: The psychologist came here a few times, and come now also. 
I: Is he good or bad for you?
R: No, it is worse, if I talk to him I feel worse, if I I tell all my story. -He comes every Wednesday. 
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: When the Yazidi community helps you is it better or worse for you? If the Yazidi community says I want to help you to forget these things, it it good or bad for you? 
R: It is good. 
I: How much? 
R:  A lot.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: When you feel bad, you don't feel ok and you think a lot, what do you do to feel calm and relaxed? What is good for you? 
R: Nothing is good for me. 
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: Now I'm going to give you some options about the ones who can help you. If the things I tell helps, you'll say yes or no. If it helps you will tell me how much it helps. Ok? 
R: Ok.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Is medication useful for you? 
R: No. 
I: And in Iraq, did the medication in Iraq helped you or not? 
R: If we had, yes. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: Does the psychologist help you or not?
R: No, When I see psychologist, I tell about it, I feel like it is the same day that the Isis caught us. 
I:Did you see the psychologist?
R: Yes.
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: You know sometimes you can speak to a psychologist alone for an hour for example, did you do that or not? 
R: No. Two women come here, one of them is a translator like you. 
I:  You alone?
R: Yes.
I: How often does she come?
R: On Wednesdays. 
I: Does she help you or not?
R: It has been a year. One of them comes, it doesn't help me and then another one comes. It is not useful. 
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
I: Do you talk together to a doctor? For example some days they call three, four women. They sit and talk to them. Do you do that or not? 
R: No. 
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Sheyk or someone like do they help you so that you feel better? Like they pray for your health, do these things help you? 
R: No, it doesn't help. 
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: You know there are medicined the doctors give and there are herbal medicines, the ones that are prepared by the herbs, like tea. Have you had that?
R: No. I haven't seen any medicine in Germany since I came. 
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Do the social workers help you so that you pass your days or you forget your things or not? 
R: Our social workers are nice but they can't do anything. All is up to the Head responsible. And the Head responsible is very bad. Now we try to xxx .There are more than fifty children here. There are four floors and in each floor ten children it makes forty. In each floor there are three families. And they say they are going to mix all of us, a room with the other. There is not a market near. - We told them that we don't want to go there, we got used to the bus number so we can barely take our children to Kindergarten. So, if  I go there I have to change three busses to take my son to the kindergarten. They said if you want you can go Iraq or there. 
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Does the doctor help? 
R: I saw the doctor he didn't give me medicine. 
I: How much the doctor helped? If you say the doctor helped me a lot it is this one, if you say a little it is this one. 
R: A little bit
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: But you saw the doctor?
R: Yes.- And they say you are ok but you feel bad because of thinking, worrying. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did the medication help? 
R: Yes, it helps. 
I: Which one? This?
R: Yes.
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Psychologist ? How much does it help?
R:
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: The individual psychoterapy when you talk to them, helps you or not? When you and him talk to each other?
R: I haven't seen any psychoterapist. They took me for one or two times xxx
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: 
R:
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: 
R:
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: 
R:
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I:  How much the social workers help you? A lot, a little, quite a bit?
R: Quite a bit. The social workers are good but the Head responsible is not. 
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: All the things that we have asked, the doctor, the psychologist, how much do they help you so that you be well, better? Are they helpful a lot or a little? 
R: Doctors?
I: The ones we have asked, the psychologists, the social workers, all of them that we asked you, how much have they helped so far? I mean all of them. 
R: They are good.
I: A lot or a little?
R: They are helpful.
I: When you came here you didn't know the language but now you can maintain your life. You understand what I'm saying? - These doctors and other things, what should they do so that you feel better? What kind of help do you need, how can these people help ypu so that you can be better? Should they write medicines for you, what kind of help should they give you? 
R: Medicine. If they took me to the doctor, he would give me lots of medicines so I would get well.  
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: What kind of help do you need, that you would you I'll get better but no one gives you that help? I mean you would say I need this and this but they don't give to me. - You don't understand? 
R: Yes, I understand. 
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: I will read something more to you now. If you remember these symptoms you  will say youyourself is in the same situation. OK?
R: 
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: When I remember  these things in the past, my life becomes like it was before, like you feel you are dead.
R:When I remember I can't sleep properly.
I: A lot, a little?
R:Quite a bit, not like in Iraq. 
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Can you sleep at nights or not? 
R:Yes I sleep. Sometimes I wake up and can't sleep, but not always. 
I: How much? Can you show me? 
R:  A little bit.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Since you came here, do something make you think about it, or they don't make you ?  When you go our you see someone from them, is it always, ssometimes, or now always that they make you think? 
R: Yes, they make me think. When I see someone like them I'm afraid and run to home. 
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you feel angry sometimes? 
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Quite a bit.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: You don't want to feel angry or upset but it is not up to you. 
R: No, I don't want. I feel calm, I become angry, I worry,  it is not up to me. 
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: When you don't want to think on that but you still think on that. Do you have the same? 
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: A lot. I want to forget but. 
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Sometimes is it something like a dream, you don't believe that so much things happened?
R: Yes, it is like a dream. 
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: When you remember these thingss you try to stay away or you want to think of them? 
R: No, I don't want to think. 
I: You stay away?
R: Yes, I do.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Sometimes the things that happened comes in front of your eyes or no? I mean like a picture in front of your eyes, the things that happened. 
R: Yes, the pictures are in front of my eyes. 
I: How much?
R: A lot. xxx. This morning I told my son that "I saw that the Isis caught you again." It is always in my mind. 
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: You feel scared easily or feeling grief?
R: I scare.
I: You are scared easily? How much?
R: Extremely. 
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: I try not to think on it but I do. Do you try not to think on it?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: Extremely. 
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: Sometimes inside yourself are you aware you have feelings, you listen to yourself? Or you say nevermind, it is not necessary that I think on it.
 R: I tell to myself to leave all of them, but the thoughts are in my mind again like before. 
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Sometimes when you think of this do feel like you are half dead, like you don't feel it?
R: How?
I: Your life is not like it used to be. Is it so or not? You don't feel like before. 
R: No, I don't. It is not like before.
I: A lot, a little?
R: A lot. 
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Sometimes when you remember those thing you feel like the time you were captived by Isis. For example sometimes when Isis told you not to do this you still did, did you understand? Sometimes here in Germany you feel like you are in that time. 
R: No, I don't feel so. 
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Can you sleep easily or not? 
R: I sleep easily and I wake up easily. 
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: sometimes it is difficult for you sometimes not so difficult. Is it true or not? Some days you feel well some days are very hard for you. 
R: How?
I: Like yesterday night and now are not same. 
R: Yes, that's true. 
I: Your life like yesterday night was like today. Some days it is difficult for you some days it is not. 
R: Yes, some days it is good some days it is not. 
I: How much?
R: Quite a bit. 
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you want to forget all these things and never remember again?
R: Yes, I do.
I: How much?
R: A lot. I say if I and my husband come together I'm going to forget. 
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you feel concentrated or sometimes your concentration is on something else?
R: Yes, my mind goes somewhere else. 
I: How much? 
R:It goes.
I: Like now? 
R: (Laughs)
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: When you remember those day, do you have trouble breathing, do you sweat? 
R: I feel bad. 
I: How bad? Do you feel dizzy? How do you feel bad? 
R: I become restless. 
I: Do you sweat?
R: No, when I become restless I want to go outside immediately. 
I: You don't have trouble breathing right? You said when you become restless you become so. You feel well other days? 
R:
I:  How much? 
R: I'm fine if I feel  bad it is a lot.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you dream ?
R: Yes a  lot.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel more concentrated  now , better than before ? 
R: My concentration is not good now. I forgot things. I go to the school they teach us. I come home my fourteen years old daughter teach me and she gets angry to me and say why I don't learn. I forget. I can't learn anything. 
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: do you want to talk about these things or you don't want to talk about these things? Do you try ro stay away from these talks or you say I want to talk bout the things I experienced in Isis? 
R: No, I feel bad.
I: So you stay away?
R: YEs, I stay away. All comes to my mind. - Extremely.
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I: Thank you.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: In these two years in Germany, how did it pass, was it good for you or not good for you? You think it is good that they brought you to Germany or how do you think?
R: That they brought us here? It is good.
I: Good? 
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: Now how good do you find this, do you find it very good? How do you think it is?
R:I think it is good.
I: A lot? A little? Quite a bit?
R: Extremely. Here is better than filthy Iraq. 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Three things about these thing that they do for you. I mean what three things they do good for you? - They brought you Germany, isn't it? Say three good things and three bad thing.I mean how good it is for you? That your children are healthy, your children are not afraid, three good things. What is good for you here?
R: They brought us here, here is good for my children. They can go to school. Here is safe. Wherever we go we are not afraid. It is safe. We can make a living here. We couldn't do in Iraq. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Three bad things not good for you? 
R: Nothing.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I:  What do you hope for the future?
R: My hope is If Iraq improves we go back. 
I: Do you want to ask anything else?
R: No.