Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [011]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R: I'm 35. 
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?
R: Yes.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
I: Is youtr husband here?
R: No, Isis killed him. 
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I:  Now how many people live with you currently?
R:I'm with my sister and two xxx children. They are seven and I'm four. I'm with my three children and they are seven. Their house is separate. I'm with my four children, we are four.
I: You are four you and your childrena re at this house?
R: Yes, me and my children. Three boys and me. 
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
I: 
R: 
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
I: 
R:
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Can you read and write in Arabic language? 
R: What?
I: Can you read and write in another language?
R: Yes I can in Arabic, reading and  writing. 
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: What is your heighest education level?
R: I studied the primary school until 6th class.
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
I: 
R:
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I:  Do you currently go to school?
R: Yes.
I: For language?
R: Yes. I have been to the school for three months. 
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you currently employed?
R: No, I haven't worked yet. But I want to work. There is a hotel close to us. I told them I will work for a few hours. 
I: So, you will start?
R: Yes, I said I will start but the chief was not there they said he went to the court.
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before Isis were you employed?
R: No. I was doing housework. My husband was a teacher. He thought Arabic from 1st class to 6th, in primary school. 
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
I: We have a few more questions. We want you to know it will be confidental.
R:
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R:Yazidi
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: What is your ethnic group? Turkmen, Arab, Kurdish, Shemaq?
R: Yazidi.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: Thank you for your answers. Now we will discuss your priorities on the future.
R: ok
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What are your concerns and priorities now?
R:It is that my children settle. I mean that they have a family, that they work . I also go to school and I also work. And that we can make a living. 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need to rebuild your life?
R: I should stand up, or it doesn't work. I have three children. I need to work. Germany brought us here, they did a lot to us that no one else did for us. They are like a family to us. They are our family. We haven't seen any other one who adopted us. We fled from those infidels, we had a lot of difficulties. We paid money. If we didn't ran away they wouldn't let us. And my children two of them were with me, they had taken my old son he wasn't with me for a year. they made him a soldier. They phoned so he was also rescued. They brought here also.
I: So, what do you need to rebuild your life?
R: I should forget everything, work, take care of my children, help myself and my children. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: How much control do you have on your life?
R: Here?
I: Yes, tell me how much control you have? A little, quite a bit, none?
R: Control? There is no control on me. I'm free here. I'm in peace. 
I: So you mean you have a lot of control?
R: Yes, I'm in peace. 
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think future holds for you?
R: As I said before my children. They go to school. That they go to school . The most important thing for me is my children. I don't have anything else. And I myself want to go to school and I have education. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situatiion in Iraq improves where would you want to live? In Iraq, Kurdistan, Germany or somewhere else?
R: In Germany. 
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
I: Can you explain why you chose Germany?
R: Germany is very good for us. They helped us a lot. We are here and we have peace here. After my husband I have nothing left in Iraq. - And my children don't have a future there. There is no school or anything. For my old son we went there. They are not accepted to xxx school there. They don't have a future there. 
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?
R: Yes.
I: A lot?
R: Yes.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: How would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?
R: Very good. 
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Can you explain why your life in Germany is very good?
R: It is very good. I'm in peace here. I want to stay here forever. If they don't tell me to return, I don't want to return to Iraq. I'm in peace here.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If you return to Iraq or Kurdistan what should change so that you stay there?
R: Now, if I go to Iraq, it is not like here. We have to work there with my children to make a living. And without my husband it is difficult there. 
I: But the question is xxx(arabic)
R: At first to have men there is important  for us , the Yazidis. In Kocho in our village as you know no one survived. We were relatives all of us. No men is left. 
I: So you say if Kocho were like before you would.
R: Yes, as I say even if half of the men left they would help us, the widowed women. There is no men left. But here you can live even if you don't have men.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
I: There are other questions about this issue now.
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: What is justice for you?
R: Justice is to get rid of Isis. They did a lot to us and to some Msulims also. If their power weren't broken they would invade everywhere. 
I: xxx(Arabic)
R: What do I think? I think if the court is just, they are going to lose. If I went to the court now, I would tell whatever I saw, if the court is just they should be sentenced. Without a reason, we haven't done anything to anyone. They would come and we would eat and drink together we were like brother and sisters. They were on their religion and we were on ours. We were like brothers. They were our houses. They would go and come sometimes. And in the end they, when Isis came they became enemy, they delivered us to Isis. 
I: Who?
R: Our muslim neighbours, they became friends with Isis and they caught us. - If we did something to them it was ok they had right, but we didn't do anything bad to them. We were always good.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
 I: How much important is it for you to have justice for what happened in Isis conflict?
R: It is very important.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: How much optimistic are you that you will ever gert justice?
R: Extremely.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How much important is it for you that the one who commieted violence be judged?
R: Isis? It is very important.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Can you explain why it is important for you?
R: They are very bad people, I have seen them. They are wild. If a woman talked something to them, say what is in her heart they killed her. They do nothing good . There is nothing good with them. If they talk in front of you like a brother when you turn your back they are traitor. They are bad, very bad. There is nothing good with them.
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who is responsible for this? Their chief?
R: Yes, because he told them to do so. 
I: Their soldiers were not so?
R: I have seen their soldiers. Whatever their superiours told them they would do so. - We told them many times why do you do this? They said it is not up to us. There is someone commanding us. 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: How should these people be held accountable? By court, by sueing them, or money?
R: Who, the ones who are unfair to us? 
I: Yes. The ones in Isis, what should happen to them? 
R: They should be killed. 
I: What do you think about judging them?
R: I wish they could be able to judge them, they deserve death. But whatever I say is of no use. They did nothing good. xxx . They didn't do anything good to us. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Are you aware that there are people working on this, to bring them to the courts. Do you know anything about that?
R: Yes, I have heard that their court sentence them to prison.
I: Where did you hear about the court?
R: I heard so and I have seen on facebook that they are judged. 
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
I: 
R:
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Can you forgive those men?
R: No.
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: What should happen so that you can forgive them?
R: No, I can never forget.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with Isis? 
R: It is very important for me. You know why? I just want to know wherever they xxx , and how many are dead and how many people are captured, who is alive who is dead, the men. 
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How much important is it for you that the world know what happened during the conflict with Isis?
R: They should know yes. How it happened, where they invaded, how many people are dead. 
I: How important is it that the other people know?
R: The other people? Ok. Yes it is important for me. 
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that future generation knows?
R: I don't want them to know, the little ones. I don't want my little children know but the old one knows. On facebook he/she looks at it and knows. But I don't want them to know. I want them to forget. 
I: When the children grow older do you want to tell them?
R: When they grow old? How? 
I: I mean that you tell that what happened in conflict with Isis. 
R: No.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I:  You said it is important for you and the world to know, for your children it is not important. Why you answered so, can you tell us?
R:  I should know, then other people should know what happened. But I don't want my children to know. For their psychology I want them to forget as far as they can to forget. 
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: 
R:
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you heard about the truth commission? 
R: Where?
I:  In Iraq.
R: I have been there yes, the Genocide.
I: Have you heard the truth commision? 
R: Aha, yes I have heard.
I: It is the truth commission.
R: I haven't been there but I have heard. 
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: The truth Commission investigates what  happened in the conflict with Isis, not just Isis all wars . They are created by government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission?
R: In Iraq?
I:  Yes. 
R: xxx (Arabic) 
I: Do you want such a thing to be created? 
R: I want it a lot. But I haven't been there so I don't know. We were in a village, in a village in sinjar so I haven't been to such places. I was always at home and in the village. I was with my children at home. But I want that such a thing exist for the justice. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What do you think should be done for the victims of Isis? Of Yazidi, Muslims.
R: We have been here. They are very nice to ius. There are a lot in Iraq also living in the tents, in the fields. It would be good if they build somewhere for them. Because everyone can not come to Europea. They can't bring all the Yazidis. Yazidis or muslims, whomever had the violence, everyone can not come, so if only at least they could build a place for them. 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?
R: The Yazidis, they don't have houses. If they could build houses for them, they would return to their homeland. 
I: You mean in Kocho village or in somewhere else?
R: No,not in Kocho. There is noone in Kocho no men, no women and children, they came here. But the other Yazidis. It is important they built some places for them and they could return to their places. They are outside, in the rain, in the snow. c
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?
R: What kind of victim?
I: Victim of Isis.
R: xxx Arabic
I: How much are you a victim? Half, a lot?
R: A lot. If now I could I would kill them.
I: We asked you so now we ask for all the people if they are victim. You said you don't know. Can you answer? 
R: I don't know. I don't talk to anyone, I just go to school and come back. - For example now I know not all Muslims support the Isis. They harmed them a lot also. But because they did a lot of violence to us our we started to dislike all Muslims. There are friends in my school, they are very nice. They are from Syria. And sometimes I forgot everything and suddenly I become angry and start to argue with them. They don't say anything but I just become restless I don't know why. That's why. And they ran away from Isis like us. Isis was so bad so I feel restles when I'm with muslims. 
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: 
R: 
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
I: We will as a few questions about how we can improve the situation in Iraq.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: In your opinion, is it possible to have peace in Iraq?
R: If the Iraqi Government can control iraq they can. We have seen that when the Isis came half of the Iraq became friends with them, they became traitors. So what I mean is if they act as unity and if the Iraqi government can control there, it is goind to be very good.
I: So you now think peace is possible in Iraq?
R: Yes, it should happen, I hope it is going to happen.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the Arab countries?
R: I don't know. The Arab countries have problems. It is something about them. Why don't they have peace? Why such things don't happen in the Western countries? They create their own problems. It is difficult.
I: Like it is not going to happen?
R: Yes.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? The parties should do, the government?
R: Yes. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: What do you know about the military campaign against Isis?
R: It was good that they attacked Isis. If they let them to do, they would have invaded all the places. What they did was to kill, they didn't do anything good. If they let them they would have tried to invade these countries also. But the good thing is they blocked them. 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities like Yazidis ?
R: They should do such a good thing and protect the people there, especially the Yazidis, you know why? The Yazidis are poor people, they can do nothing, but they just live in the country. The state is of the Muslims. Yazidis just live there. xxx
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
I: We talked about justice now we have questions about your experiences, what you have experienced. 
R: When I was in Isis?
I: Yes.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?
R: Here they took me to the police, I gave them my testimony. 
I: I mean to all the people, not just the police, to the people you know..?
R: I told no one else. I tell them that all of you know what had happened and that's all. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: 
R:
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: 
R:
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Who do you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones you have spoken to. You family or friends for example. 
R: When I fled first I told my story to my family. 
I: Did you talk to the doctors, to the social workers here?
R: No.
I: To the media?
R: No.
I: To the lawyer? 
R: No.
I: Police?
R: They came here and took me. The police came here and took me and I talked to them that's all. 
I: Did you talk on the internet, on the facebook? 
R: No.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
I: And did you talk to someone else?
R: No.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
I: You said you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?
R: No, they told me. The social workers told me that they will come and took you. They took many of us. Each time they took three of us and bring back. They told us that we need to tell our story to them when we were in Isis. We went there told our story and came back. They came here, took us with car and we came back. 
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
I: Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?
R: They told me that my xxx is with Dr. Ilhan, the ones who brougth us here, they said you know xxx.
I: So you know? 
R: Yes.
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?
R: No. 
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?
R: Npo, I didn't write.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
I:
R: 
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	
R: What I know is just the news on facebook.
I: So do you read the news everyday?
R: Yes, everyday.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you seek information?
R: I should know what's going on, where have they taken back. The most important thing is the captives. There are many captives. 
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: Where do you seek information? From your family, tv, internet, radio? 
R: I seek on facebook. They publish news on facebook and I look from facebook.
I: Newspaper?
R: No, just facebook.
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other ? 
R: Whatsapp, all on whatsapp. 
I: Facebook?
R: No
I: Radio, Tv?
R: No.
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
I: This is the last part of the interview and it is about how your experience with Isis affects your life, we are going to ask now. 
R: The time when I was there or when I'm here now?
I: About here, and we will ask now. If you don't want to answer to any question you don't have to. 
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?
R: It was difficult, still I don't understand how we could stay there. God helped. Each hour that I was with them I was like dead. We always prayed God to kill us until God helped us escape. I don't know how it happened. It was difficult. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: How long did you spend in captivity?
R: Ten months.
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?
R: When we escaped, they didn't let us go outside. And the one that I was staying with...
I: xxx Arabic
R: xxx Arabic. 
I: I'll translate what you just told now.... Mosul...
R: No, I was in Syria
I: You said you were in Syria then you went to Mosul.
R: No, I was in Tal Afar, then they took me from Tal Afar to Syria. But I was in Syria for eight months. - They took me to Raqqa first, I stayed in Raqqa for eight days then they took me to Al Shaddad. - So I was in that house, me and my friends, two other Yazidi girls. Three of us were in that house. And the one that I was stayin his house went to Mosul, he had something to do in Mosul. So there were two other houses, their people were there, their houses were close to us. 
I: You mean the houses of the soldiers?
R: Yes of Isis. 
I: They they came to visit them and then the door was open. I went outside. As  you know we were in the black clothes. I wore them and I went to the market without their knowing. I went and called. I knew my brother's number. There wasn't internet there. I went to the internet cafe.  Because there wasn't internet there, Beshar Esad cut it.  So, I went to the internet cafe. If you went there in the evening there was no way as the Isis men were talking to other countries. So, I went in the afternoon, it was hot outside. There was no on inside. I went there the door was closed. I stayed for a while they opened the door. I called my brother I told him that it's me and if you can rescue me. He told me " when you can go outside again?" , I told him that he is not at home tomorrow, so I can go out tomorrow at 12.00 in the noon. - So I went and called and he said when can you go out, I said tomorrow, he said we are going to send a man for you. He looks like this and this, this is how he looks like. He said don't be afraid he is not from the Isis, like them he has long hair and beard, he has a scarf like the Isis, the Saudi all have scarfs. And he said someone from our village, it is like his car. I came home, I couldn't say to my friends. I felt really bad. I said how I can flee secretly and they will stay here, and I'm afraid to tell them. They didn't have children, I had children. I I told them and their men were at home and they would learn and took my two children. They had taken one they would take the others. I was afraid.  I said I can not put my children in danger. I didn't tell them. I told my son, he was 11 years old, I told him I called your uncle, tomorrow we will go to the market, don't tell anyone, we will go and they will send someone for us and if we can we will run away. He said I'm afraid, they will catch us. 
I: Your son?
R: Yes, my son. 
I: Your sons were with you?
R: Yes, they were with me and because of them I couldn't tell to the girls. If they learn't they would take both of them.- If they had caught us they would have taken my children and I would have never seen them. So, I didn't tell them. And still many times I remember them and I say why I left them and came. I wanted that they came with me but I could not tell them. I was afraid. The men that they were with were at home. They came home each time and ask them and no one asked me. They would ask about them. And they would not ask about someone else. And the man that was with was not at home. I could run away that time or I could not run away another time. And I didn't tell them. And I came. It was 11.00. My son was afraid. I told him not to afraid, maybe God will help us. He said if they cathch us we will never see each other again. I said inshallah God will help they will not catch us. So they asked me where to take me, I said I will come to near a bakery. They said Machber Sheddadi. I said ok I will come there. They said we will tell them man to come there, we have sent your sons's photos to him. I was in black clothes so he would not know me. They said he will know your children. So, the car came, it was like the one in our village. So when I saw it I told my son that it is this. It was like they told me. And as he saw my children he knew them. So, the mans saw us but he could not hold his hand up. someone were sitting behind us. He just did his hand like this. I went I opened the door, I said him my brother's name, he said get on the car. I get on the car. - So the man told us you will get off somewhere and there is a yellow taxi waiting and you will go and get on that. He said that car will get you out of the village. They don't let someone inside my car to get out of the village. He said I will get you after this region. We get on the taxi the man was Syrian, he was speaking Syrian. He asked me questions, he said I'm from Syria etc. He said we are going now if they stop the taxi I have nothing to do with you, I'm just owner of the taxi and I get you. Tell them that you will go somewhere. I said it is ok. He said if they stop us we have nothing to do with each other. I said ok. When we arrived there two men were waiting there, a car was waiting behind us. The two two control police put their heads inside cars. The taxi drove past next to them and I hold my head. 
I: So, they didn't stop you?
R: Yes, we knew the control police (of Isis) were waiting there.
I: xxx Arabic
R: xxx Arabic - The two of the control police, their head were dealing with other cars, so the taxi passed by them. - So the taxi passed by them, out of that region and then it stopped and the other car was coming behind us. So it stopped and we got on it again and the taxi turned back. And he drove us from Syrian boder to Iraqi Border. I asked him where will you take us? He said I'm going to phone, I work with soldier if he is available I'll take you to Haseke.
I: In Syria?
R: Yes, in Syria. - He called then he said he the soldier says I'm not available, I have works to do I went to Mosul. So the driever said I have to take you to my house until he returns. But he said you need to lie in the car. Our neighbours shouldn't see as they will report us. - He took me to his house. He put me in his bedroom. He closed the door. He said you shouldn't get out the children of the neighbours come house and if they see they will know and they will behead me. I said ok. We stayed in that room for three days believe me my children couldn't even go to toilet. They were cryin they said they wanted to go toilet. One day they cried. I said why are you crying? They said mom, we are going to get suffocated in this room. - I told them be patient we are going to go to your father soon, we will escape. We have to stay here if you open the window they will come and cathch us again. And then late at around ten they switched off all the lamps, it was dark everywhere and then we could go to the toilet. So we stayed there in this situation for three days. His wife brought food to us secretly. In a noon he said waer your black clothes lie inside the car, I'll take you, they told me to take you. So, he took us to Syria again. I was afraid I told him what if they know me and my children, as they know us. He said I'm not going to take you from that road I'm going to take you from another road. He passed from a village in Syria it was in a deep valley in which you could not see anywhere. He stopped his car there. He said now two men will come, you will get on their car and they will take you to Haseke. He said you have to stay inside car until they come. Then the two men came. One was young the other one was old. The young one was driving the car. They told me you need to sit between them with children. So, I sat between them and we went. Before I got on the car they told me if someone asks you questions like  where are you from, where are you going, never talk in Kurdish. And never say you are Yazidi they will catch you and will never let you go. 
I: So they took you to Haseke after that?
R: Yes, to Haseke.
I: Your chiildren knew Arabic? 
R:  Yes, but they forgot now.
I: Yes but they knew then?
R: Yes. - They took us to Haseke. The man gave me his wife's identity card and he said if they stopped us somewhere you'll show this identity card. The young boy gave me his wife's identity card and he said if they stopped us and asked for your identity give this one. He said if they stopped us tell them that this is my uncles and my husband's brother. 
I: I said ok.
R: so we went and we stopped in two checkpoints they didn't ask me anything. They asked them like where are you going, and are you a family, they said we are a family. They didn't ask me. They told me that if they ask you answer if not don't answer. But they didn't ask me anything. So, they took me to Haseke and told me to get on another car. So, I gave the identity car of that man's wife and I got on the other car, sat back seats. One of the men spoke in Kurdish and he said sister come to the fronts seats. He said if they stop us now we will say we are a family. He said if we don't say that we are a family they will ask me where did you bring her from.I went sat next to him. They took us to Qamishlo and then to Delik, it is in syria also, they are Yazidi also.- He said me here you escaped. So they took me, the Peshmergas checked my information and then I went with someone Yazidi, to Shemal. He would take me to Kurdistan. He was young he said he is from Syria, Sinjar, he said in the beginninghe didn't know we were Yazidi. So we were guset there and they gave us food, my children ate but I couldn't eat because I was so happy. I didn't eat but my children ate a little. He told me to stay with his sister in another tent in the camp. I selpt there that night the other day at ten oclock in the morning they brought me to Kurdistan. I went to Zaho. - That soldier who brought us, I forgot to tell you before, I asked him how did you manage to take us he told me xxx
I: Did you pay money?
R: Yes, One and half defter  for my children. 
I: So how much money is that?
R: One defter is € 12.000, and half . Do you know million of Iraq A million is € 1000 and a defter is 12 million. And half defter also. So it is about €16.000. And after that my son came after us. We paid one defter just for him. 
I: Your brother paid?
R: Yes.
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	
R: A lot. 
I: Can you tell me what problems it caused?
R: You know the Arabs in Syria they marry women, that was hard. 
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I:
R: 
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now we are going to read some options and you can tell if you have them or not.
R: Ok.
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: Because of the violence of Isis do you have any pain?
R: I don't have pain. My it has been four months that I feel like my heart will get out of my chest. I feel bad. 
I: Not all days?
R: No. Sometimes when I'm not aware it happens. Or sometimes when I'm very busy and I'm not aware and the children make a suden noice i tremble immediately.  I'm afraid.
I: So half half?
R: yes.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you feel Parasthesia of the skin?
R: No, but whenI'm afraid my body becomes loose. I tremble. And until sometime later I relax. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Movement disorder?
R: No.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you tremble?
R: Yes sometimes ir happens. When I'm lying in the room and my sister's children come I scare and I told them many time not to make sudden noices I'm scared, I tremble and my body becomes loose. 
I: Can we say alot?
R: Yes.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Do you have limitations in your eyes, ear?
R: My eyes they are ok. I have np probelm in them but when I go to school I listen to lesson I have headache and earache. I don't know it is because of which one. I had an appointment at a doctor and the doctor said it is not because of your eyes he said go another one for head. 
I: How much pain do you have in your eyes? A lot a little?
R: A lot. 
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: You said you had shortness of breath?
R: Yes, I feel restless, bad. 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you feel losing balance?
R: No.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Your heart?
R: Yes.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I:Stomache?
R: No
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I: Do you have any other symptoms? You have headache?
R: Yes, I have headache and if i sense something I'm scared sometimes. Nothing else. 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
I:
R:
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
I: 
R:
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: What reasons can you show for these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?
R: They were the reason. The Isis. I don't know. I have seen a lot of fear and hardship. That's why I feel bad. I told you that not all muslims, I know that not all muslims were with them, and many of them had been killed also and some of them had to run away but still when I see muslims I feel scared. 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: I will read some questions for you. xxx Arabic. 
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Like psychological problems. Do they have a lot of effects on you or a little?
R: Not always but sometimes I feel very bad. 
I: So we can say half -half?
R: Yes.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you have physical causes? 
R: When I become angry, I always raise my voice say God "you kill me, you give me peace."Sometimes when I become very angry I cry "God! What have we done that you did this to us?". I feel very very bad. Then I calm down and I say elhamdulillah it is all His deeds. I pray forgive me. 
I: That happens not always?
R: No, not always. Sometimes I feel ok sometimes bad. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: xxx Arabic.
R: When that man he took me for himself, my children were in front of the door crying for me. That picture is always in my mind. 
I: So this things are the reason for your trembling?
R: I don't know. I fear when I feel something. I don't know. 
I: You say half?
R: I don't know, when the children cry suddenly I fear that something happened. 
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Can the religious causes, punishment of God, be reason that you feel bad, sick?
R: Yes, many times I think I say all our men have been killed.  And even before men I think of the honour of men. I mean when someone kills this men and take their honour because they don't want to convert to their religion, it was like that in us. Everyone was on their own religion. 
I: xxx Arabic.
R: Yes, many time I think this is by God, He is testing us. 
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?
R: Not a lot, not like before. After this one can't look at the others' eyes. One always think he is low,he can't talk, they will tell us that Isis did this to you. We say to ourselves. We don't know if the other people will think so. We say we are not honoured like before. 
I: How does it affect your children?
R: My children? No they are fine. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	
R: It is like before.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: You don't feel that you are excluded from the Yazidi community?
R: I just think to myself. But they don't think so, they think like before. But I feel that way. 
I: How much do you think that you are excluded?
R: A lot.
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?
R: I have faith. Yes, Isis did that. Like i told you that sometimes I feel very restless I say something  and then after a while I calm down and I day it by God. He can do even worse things to the human. It is His judgement and we welcome it. 
I: So your faith is like before?
R: Yes. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I: So your Yazidi faith is like before, or it lessened?
R: Yes, it is like before.
I: So it didn't change?
R: No. 
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?
R: I don't want to remember. I want to forget. And when I think too much I feel bad. So I say if I think too much it is bad. I say it is better to cut my thought and return. 
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: What can you do for symptom relief?	
R: I need to go outside, go to school. When I go to school and get busy with lessons I forget. I want to learn German also and work also for a few hours. I don't want to sit home. If I sit at home it gets worse. I should go out, get busy to forget. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?
R: 
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Does beleive in collective strenghts of the Yazidis help you to forget?
R: Yes, a lot. 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe in personal strenght?
R: Yes, a lot.
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: When you pray does it help?
R: Yes, it helps a lot. I pray God to help me to forget.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: When you retreat, stay alone does it help?
R: No, I should always talk to someone or go outside with someone. I don't want to stay alone. - When I'm alone I think of it, of Isis. But when I get busy or talk to someone I don't remember. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: xxx Arabic
R: Yes, a lot. 
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Exchange trauma contents with others, does it help?
R: Yes, it does.
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Seeking professional help, doctor, psycho-therapists?
R: I saw the psycholog once but it didn't help. 
I: It didn't help?
R: He didn't talk. He gave me medicines, I don't want to take medicines of psychology. They are not good. So, I said if I get over it with my own strenght it is better. 
I: So, you will say not at all?
R: Yes.c
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: xxx Arabic.
R: Yes.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?
R: I need to forget, I need to get outside talk to the Germans. If I learn language I will forget. I will go to school, go to work. - It is important to learn language here. Language is important when you go to doctor for appointment and such things. So, first we should learn their language. 
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
I:
R:
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: xxx. Arabic.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: xxx
R: I saw once. He gave me some medicines and said they are for sleep  and some others and told me to take them. I took one in the evening and then I had stomachache. And then I didn't take. I didn't take the ones for sleeping also. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: Psychologist, did you see?
R: No.
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: 
R: 
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
I:
R:
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Religious or traditional healer?
R: No.
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Herbal medicine,like tea?
R: No.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Social workers did they help you or not?
R: They were good yes.
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Have you seen doctor?
R: Yes. For one two times. For my stomacache. And once for the pain in my arm. And for my eyes. 
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did it help, the doctor?
R:  I saw doctor two times. 
I: So did it help?
R: Yes. 
I: A lot or a little?
R: Yes, a lot. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Did psychologist help you?
R: No, he asked me questions and 
I: So it didn't help?
R: No.
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I:
R:
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I:
R:
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Social workers, did they help?
R: Yes.
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? xxx arabic
R: What can I say. For example the psychological thing. I think it is not possible that one can heal by themselves. 
I: So you say the medication for psychology didn't help you?
R: No. I want to heal by myself. I don't want to take medicines. I want to get well by myself without medicine. 
I: Yes, but how can you do. In terms of social ? Is it going to be better? 
R: Yes, for example we came this house it was not something up to our wish. It is something very nice. But now I don't feel comfortable we have been here for two years. We are not comfortable. We are two families staying here. We are not comfortable so we want to stay in separate houses each of us with their children. So they said we can not give you such a thing. I want an apartment. So at least if I could work I would have an apartment for me and my children to stay together. 
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Her question is do you want some other aids to help you, something else for example, a doctor, a herbal medicine or a psycholog?
R: No, I don't want anything but I will go to school go to work, they will help me more.
I: How can you help yourself alone?
R: I don't want to take medicines. Even at my house I didn't want to take them. If it was not for something very important I didn't take medicines. I don't want to take medicines for psychology, I want to go outside, go to school, that's better for me to help me.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS . xxx arabic.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: The first question is, when you remember your experiences do they bring your feelings back?
R: Yes. 
I: In the last days did it happen to you?
R: Yes.
I: A lot? 
R: Yes, when I remember I get very angry. 
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have problem sleeping?
R: No, I can sleep. Even when I was captured by Isis I could sleep. You what my problem is if I fear I sleep earlier. When I was in captivity of Isis and when I feared my body trembled and I slept. I slept very easily. 
I:xxx
R: No
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I:Did other thing kept you think about it?
R:Just this one. And before it me my husband, my family and my children we were together. In that side it is also difficult. Now when my children ask for something, they remind me something. When my little son cries I feel very bad. His father didn't let him cry. So I remember such things, the time before Isis. We were in peace then. We were not very reach but we were in peace. That's why when I remember those times I feel bad. The children remain orphan. They haven neither father nor uncle. They even don't have an uncle now who at least could advise them sometimes. They are all gone.  
I: The questions is does things come to your mind?
R: Yes, a lot. 
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: When you remember those things you become angry?
R:Yes, a lot.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: 
R: 
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: I thought about it when I didn't mean to
R: Yes.- A lot.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real
R: Most time when I think of it I feel like it was a dream. I ask myself why I can't see those people anymore. It is like a dream. Still I feel that maybe someone still lives but there is no one. They killed all men from our village and their graves are there. I can't believe how they can kill 450 people. That's difficult. 
I: So you think a lot?
R: Yes.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: You tried to forget those things? 
R: Yes, I tried but I didn't forget. 
I: You try a lot?
R: Yes, I do try. But it doesn't work.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Pictures about it popped into my mind. 
R: Yes.
I: A lot?
R: Yes.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try to forget them?
R:Yes, I do.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them
R: Yes. Sometimes I tell myself if I do this I will feel bad, If I do this I will feel bad. 
I: A lot?
R: Yes.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: My feelings about it were kind of numb
R: Yes.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: You sometimes feel like you were back at that time?
R: Yes. A lot. 
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Can you fall alseep easily?
R: No, not easily. 
I: So you have problem falling asleep?
R: Yes. If I think a lot I  can't fall asleep.
I: So this problem is a lot in you?
R: Yes.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: The feelings sometimes are weak sometimes they become strong in you.
R: How?
I: xxx. Arabic
R: Yes.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: I tried to remove it from my memory
R: Yes. 
I: A lot of times?
R: Yes. Lots of times I say myself that I wish I was always asleep I didn't wake up so that I wouldn't think anything. 
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: You have trouble concentrating? xxxArabic.
R: No. 
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart. xxxArabic.
R: When I become angry my heart pounds. 
I: Does it happen often or not?
R: I feel bad when I get angry. 
I: Always?
R: Not always. When I get angry. That's all. 
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: You have dreams about it?
R: Yes, I hav edreams but my dreams are always about the time before Isis, when was at home. 
I: You dream a lot?
R: When I see someone from the village , it is in my mind so I see in y dream.
I: In the last week?
R: Yes. I had dreams.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: I felt watchful and on guard . xxx Arabic. 
R: Yes.
I: A lot or not?
R: A lot.
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Do you try not to think on it?
R:Yes. 
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I: Thank you 
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: The good experiences you had in Germany in the last two years, can you tell us? xxx
R: It is good. I feel in peace here. It is very good for us. I want to stay here, my children and I are in peace. They are very good for us. And we are safe here. And they take care of us. They give us money so me and my children can make a living with. We are here in social works. Whatever we need they do for us. They are very good for us. 
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: We are going to talk about the project bringing you to Germany. Are you satisfied?
R:  A lot. 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Three positive things about this project?
R: It was very good. It helped us. We become comfortable and safe. No one from the family survived, can't make a living. In all aspects it was good for us. In all aspects. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I:Three negative things.
R: It was good. When we escaped from Isis we went to the camp. All the women were without men/husband. They were alone with their children. They couldn't make a living. They brought them here. They came here from camps. And they are in peace here now. They are not afraid. It is safe here. We can sleep in safity here at our homes. Our children have a good future here. They go to school. They get education. 
I: I said thre negative things?
R: There is nothing negative. It is good in all aspects. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
i: What hopes do you have for the future?
R: My hope for the future is to go school and make a living as far as I can. And that my children also go to school here and keep up.