Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [019]
I: we will start recording.
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?
R: yes,----- i have showed you my children,you ask if i'm married.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
I: Where is your husband?
R:  they killed him, along with 4 brothers in law,and 2 of sons.
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: How many people live with you now? how many of you 
R: 3 people,3 sons,2 year old,7 years old, 14 years old
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I:Can you read or write a little bit?
R: what to do ?
I:  Can you read or write?
R: no I have never went to school.
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: are you attending school currently?
R: no
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
I: Do you want to attend school here?
R:  nothing stays in my mind, I just want to be totally awake and capable of fighting Isis. but nothing stays in my mind at all. nothing at all.I don't think about anything but These girls and boys.,Day and night. i raised my oldest son for 24 years old,24 years.. the other is 21 years old, the girl is 19 years old, another one 17 years old. they all were together.Even my daughter, the little one she was nine years old, my son who came is older than her. but the rest were all grown ups.They were all gone
If my two sons asked me to prepare food, I spend almost about an hour looking for something I don't  remember  where I have put it, therefore I bring something else, because of overthinking.  I spend an hour looking for the salt, sometimes I look for the oil.. it takes time to prepare a simple meal. I feel like I have lost my brain. Sometimes I feel stressful and angry so I go out, I really feel stressful
I:  it's a normal thing since you have faced and went through this experience
R:  and sometimes I cry every day and sometimes I Cry 3-4 times a day.
I: we are sorry
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Do you have a job currently?
R:  I have nothing, my daughters my sons my husband,my brothers in law  were gone, everything I own and have is gone, I have nothing left in this world. My daughters and sons were similar to your age( may God protect you) they killed them in front of my eyes and they were gone. it's really hard.
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: are you looking for a job?
R:  I can't work 
R: I am in pain, my head my eyes. I have pain from head to toes.  I went to the doctor but he said I have nothing. He said it's in your bone.
I:  it's normal for people like you, who went through this horrible experience.
R: They brought me my daughter who is 14 years old, they took her for themselves, Her skin was peeled off  and there was blood everywhere when they brought her because of the beating by them. They said” what to tell you”, I said” don't tell me anything, but don't take (Ghalia)  from me” ,I ate mud, I said i am willing to eat mud and water.But then they told me if I don't stop they will kill my two children. 
I: you have done everything you could, Have  they hurt you?
*not sure about the transcripe.
I:  can we continue the questions?
R: yes
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I:  did you work before Isis attack?
R:  my husband was on the border, in the military.
I:  you? you?
R:  I was stay-at-home wife,I took care of my children( bathing them feeding them) back in Iraq.  my 8 children  used to go to school, I prepared food for them,  bathed them all and so on.
I: Thank you for your answers 
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
I:  remember that this interview is confidential.
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R: My Religion? Sheikh ---
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: What is your ethnic group? Yazidi? Kurdish? Arabic/turkamn?
R:  Kurdish\Yazidi like the rest of the world Kurdish\yazidi
I: Kurdish or yazidi?
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: We will discuss now your future
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: we want to know,In your life, What do you think of the future? 
R:  in my life I was so happy with my children, after I got married I gave birth to my children, they grew up, they became students they were good, I was so happy about my children. 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need to rebuild your life?
R:  I hope that my two children get away from these infidels,I don't know if they are alive or dead. when I came from there I knew from my sister-in-law that they were alive,But now they have separating her from them. but they killed the rest, only these two remained. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: I will start asking you questions,  from the worst to better, you will have to choose from them.
R: how? 
I: My question is, how much control would you say you have over your life?  none, little bit, moderate, good,extreme?
R: When my children were with me my life was great, but after Isis captured us, my children were gone, I have nothing left now, I don't think about life.
I: so it's this, bad?
R: bad
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think your future holds for you?
R:  I don't think I will  live more in the future, I am in an extensive pain. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation in Iraq improves, do you want to return to Iraq or stay in Germany or do you want to go to Kurdistan or go to another place?
R; Even if they kill me,  I will never return Kurdistan or Iraq. Iraq has destroyed my house, I will never leave here. It's like a black cloud before my eyes.
I:  so you will stay here in Germany
R:  I will stay in Germany.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I:  among these signs, which one would you pick that describes how much you feel like Germany is your homeland?
R:  I wish Germany well, they have done so much for us, but only if I could bring my children to Germany.
I:  which one would you pick? good? bad?
R: very good
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I:  You have been in Germany for 2 years, how would you describe your life here? was it good? how was it?
R:  Germany was very good, they have helped us a lot, they have done all good things for us, they try to make our hearts happy, but even though we still have this black hole in our hearts. 
*they try to please us and bring a smile to us,but we are still depressed,grieving and mourning.
I: which sign?
the interviewer: very good
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: if you once said I want to return to Kurdistan region or Iraq, What do you think should be done in order for you to feel safe?
R: When my daughter came, Like someone to help.. I can't go because  airplane ticket is very expensive, she cries and asks me to come and visit her for a month, but I can't go, I tell her I can't sometimes I say children are going to school.. I think sometimes that perhaps when someone helps me so I could travel there and see my daughter..  it's been two months since she returned.
I: my question was, what should be changed or done in Iraq so you could feel safe?
R:  I will never return to Iraq, I don't like it there anymore, it's like a black cloud in my eye. 
*black cloud: Negative feelings.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
I: Couple more questions.
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I:  what does the meaning of..
I: What does Justice mean to you?
R:  like to return to Iraq or stay here or what?
I: If you hear the word justice, what does Justice mean to you?
R:  Justice? I don't know what does this word mean? 
I: equality 
R:  we have no one in Germany, and we appreciate everything they have done for us, I want to thank them deeply, they brought us here and gave us a study salary. 
I: Do you know what does Justice mean? When all people become one and there's no difference among them.
R:  in Germany?
I:  everywhere
R:  Kurdistan has done nothing for us,My mother-in-law is there, she's a long there, living in a tent, she has no one there.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How much is it important for you To seek compensation and justice For what happened to you?
R:  if my daughter would be brought here, if they help me with my children who are being held captive, just to call and ask if they were bought, so for example to help me and buy them.  we have nothing left in Iraq.  my Sister-in-law is held captive along with her two children ,We want to know their news but there's no phone to contact. There is also my daughter and my son, 5 from our family is held captive. 
I: Our question was, how important is it for you To have Justice for what happened during the conflict with Isis? how important is it for you  that I should get punished?
R:  if I were there, I would kill them all. I don't think there is anything harder than taking the women and girls from men and their husbands for themselves. in Baaj They killed themselves and cut their hands, they have killed themselves in Syria.
I: we are so sorry.
R: and in Der al zor took the girls to themselves,She couldn't kill herself, she tried to poison herself, she cried and said there's foam dripping out of her mouth, they took her to Syria and she killed herself there, she electrocuted herself and she said I don't want them to touch me. 
PKK has redeemed her in  Mosul, now It's not normal, I think for example if she comes here and help her and take her to the doctor. 
I: The things that you are telling are ---- We are so sorry, and we hope that these missing people to be found.
R: in God’s will.
I: Can we continue our questions?
I:  or do you want to take a break? you want to drink something?
R:  we had breakfast.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I:  how do you see (what do you think)  that justice will be done for you?
R:  I don't believe so.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it for you that Isis will be held in an international trial and go to jail, how important is it for you?
R:  extremely
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I:  can you explain why you answered this way?
R: I swear if I was capable I would kill them all with my own hand, but I am trying, I wish I could go to fight them. my heart desires this.
R: I see them in my dreams, how they captured us and take us for themselves.  even though I live here now and i'm free, I still see them in my dreams. because I'm thinking about them night and day. 
I: You have been through a very horrible experience, it's normal to go through this.
R:  my daughter, this one (Jihan) stayed with them for three days and then she was brought back to me, she stayed for 3 days with them, She was staying with the girls and they didn't take her for themselves, she came to me  and stayed for 10 days and then they took her again from me, she said i didn't shower for 40 days.I told her to sleep perhaps we will manage to escape but she said they will take me again,She went crazy and lost her mind .She said you didn't see anything, you are all together and staying in the house, she said I saw everything with my bare eyes, she stayed with me for 7 days and for 7 days she kept on talking about her story.
I:  speak short sentences, I can't translate everything at once.
R: ok. 
R: She said” mum they will take me again”.  she said “ mum, there was a person who took two little boys one of them is 7 years old and the other is 9, He bathed them and then hit them”
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who should be held accountable from Isis?
R:  I don't know specific people, I was held captive for 9 months and then I was released.
I: Do you think that there's a difference between The Prince and the commander? how should they be held accountable?
R: When they were looking for the women who don't have husband's or men we trembled with fear, after a while ( not for too long) we were living in houses of Shia, since they escaped, they put us in their houses and took us to Mosul,took us to Kocho,tal afar,they took us and put us in houses.They didn't take all the women  for themselves, they didn't take me or my sister-in-law for themselves. 
I: Is there a difference in opinion between a regular soldier of Isis or a prince.  do you think there's a difference between them for punishment?
R: if the prince was to be punished that would be great.
R: not to punish him..to kill him
I:How about Isis soldiers?
R:  as I told you we didn't see much of them, I don't want to lie I'm just telling you what I've seen with my eyes. 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
kill them
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Are you aware of any current trials to bring Isis to Justice? anything to start a trial against them?
R: no
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?
R: why would I forgive them?
R:  I will not forgive Them,If they come in front of me I would cut them to pieces with a knife. they killed my children, how would I forgive them ?
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: What should happened so you could forgive?
R:  they have done terrible things to us, we forget half of the things that we should say because of the massive amount of violence we have faced.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
I:  we have more questions:
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I:  in your opinion how important is it for you to know about what happened during the conflict with Isis?
R: It was really hard, they have killed my children, Killed my brothers in law, my daughter killed herself because of them, have you seen my daughter on Facebook (jeylan). 
I: How important is it for you to know about what they did since then until now?
R:  we have seen many important things, we have faced really horrible things, unbelievably awful. my sons and Daughters were starving, they used to bring small loaf of bread with a tomato and 1 spoon of rice, that was their lunch at 4 p.m.And the rice was filled with Filth and flies ---- and we used to eat that.We have seen all of this.
I:  sorry to me it's really important for you to know about what happened.
R: that's what I know and that's what I’ve seen with my eyes
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I:  how important is it for you that the rest of the world knows about what did Isis do to you?
R: they all know
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that the future generations know about what happened?
R:  let them know
R:  4 men  used to grab old people  40-50 years old, grab the women from their hand and feet and throw them in cars. it was really hard to watch.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Can you tell me why  do you want the world and the future generations to know?
R:  let the whole world know, let our voices reach the entire world.
I:  can you explain why?
R:  we have been through everything, let the world know what we saw.
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What should be done so the future generations know about what happened?
R: Let the world know. let the world know that I have a broken heart over my children's death, let the world know that they have killed my children and my husband, let the world know that my daughter killed herself because of them.  let the world know how a girls like my daughter came and said that two of my sisters killed themselves before my eyes.
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you ever heard of an organisation called truth organisation?The voice of Truth?
R:  they came to us in Kurdistan, a lot of people like you came to us, But our voice was not heard in Iraq ,They came to us and we talked about our stories, but it wasn't helpful.
I:  so you have never heard about this organisation? the truth organisation?
R:  a lot of people came to us,Also only two yazidis came,  but still it wasn't published
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: The meaning of this word is: it's an organisation, they seek the truth about the crimes, and when they finish they write about it and publish it. And this organisation is supported by the Iraqi government.
R: they have done nothing for us in Iraq, there's nothing more beautiful than the truth. the truth is a good thing.
I:  the things that I mentioned about this organisation, do you think it's appropriate to have it?
R: yes
R: once there was this American who gave each one of us 5000 dinar,50 thousand dinar, and others didn't do a thing for us.
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What do you think in your opinion should be done for the victims isis?
R:  to stay here and not send them back to the places, that would be great. We appreciate everything they have done for us.
I:  to stay here?
R:  yes. to stay here.
R: If we had to stay in Kurdistan,we would have went crazy by now.
R:  a lot of people come to us, sisters like yourselves, They sit with us,Showing the news on the mobile phone.. as you know they have freed mosul and tal afar ,No hostages were released, a few of them only were released, from mosul only 22, a lot of people are held captive, some of them or in captivity others were killed, god knows what they did to them.  they're hostages and they were not released.
I: Khalah, It's a bit hard when you speak fast because I can't translate everything quickly.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I:  what do you think should be done for the yazidis especially?
R:  in my opinion, countries should treat them better,Protect them, yazidis should be appreciated by all the people. 
I: There was another thing, what was it?
R; What?
I:  you have said another thing I forgot it, the last thing you said?
R:  I don't know I forgot, I told you I forget half of the things I say. a lot of  sisters like yourselves come to us, if they didnt come  we would have gone crazy. They come to us all day long and give us and advice. 
I: Does this thing help?
R; yes, they help us a lot .when they come to us,and If we want to cry they prevent us.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Do you see yourself as a victim?
R:  not as a victim completely, but when I see the images and photos I feel like one,My heart can take it.
I:  do you think people around recognise you as a victim?
R: no, they all are happy and comfortable. I wish them peace of mind.
I:  So you don't see yourself as a victim?
R: no but when I look at my children and the images I feel like my heart becomes  black but I can tell you that they all helped us a lot, thanks to them.
R: These bones, men's bones are still resisting until now, my daughter’s body  is still in Syria and I have no  idea about it, the other one,Her body was left in Baaj,Her sister said that her body is wrapped in a blanket and was thrown to the dogs. because of the amount of Awesomeness about this topic I remember all of it. 
R: its hard.
I: I believe it's really hard
R:  it's really hard, I have put it in my heart and never married.it was very hard.
R: My son is 24 years old, he studied as a doctor,life science.
I: what is life science?
R: Who studies bones. 
R: He said that he knows everything from head to toes, he was a really good boy.
R:  none of the yazidis have ever studied this major. 
R: And he obtained a certificate no one has ever seen one before.
R:  and they kill him for nothing, before my eyes. 
I: Do you want to eat anything?
R: no
R:  I  can't eat  before 1, I don't have the appetite. 
R; Since I came I have let go of Everything,  I don't look after the nine year old kid, I have let go
I: You shouldn't have freed yourself
R:  I whatever I do I will not be free
I: Do other people see you as a victim?
R:  yes, whoever Comes by sees me as a victim, it's beautiful here, I buy everything for the kids, everything that they need, but my heart is still dark. 
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
I:Can I ask you a couple of more questions about the situation in Iraq? 
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: How could the situation in Iraq improve?
R: It's not good, there was almost 74 Orders that took place over the yazidis,How would a person say that Iraq is good place? 
*order: genocides and Massacres.
I: Do you believe that it's possible to have peace in Iraq?
R: there will be no lasting peace, and no improvement until forever.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I:  do you think it's possible to have a lasting peace in Arab Lands?
R:  I said before, 74 orders against the yazidis, Iraq will never improve, after they took yazidi girls and women, There is no safe place for the yazidis, and now they are all separated and not united, their houses were destroyed 
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What should be done to build a lasting peace in Iraq?
R: i swear.. I have witnessed for orders against the yazidis since I was born, in my opinion the yazidis will always remain weak and homeless.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: what do you think about the current military campaign against Isis?
R:  we feel happy when we see them fighting against Isis, and whoever was capable of killing them I say god bless him,I wish him to live long till 100..
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What do you think should be done so the yazidis and other minorities in Iraq feel safe?
R:  these orders against the yazidis
I:  what do you think should be done so these things don't happen?
R: They have done all sorts of things to the yazidis in Iraq, this lasted since forever, they have seen all kind of things, orders were taken against everyone. not only the yazidis, others too. 
I: And what do you think should be done to protect these minorities?
R:  I will tell the things that I have seen with my eyes, but the things that I have not witnessed I cannot tell, I will not tell lies. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany how often have you talked about your story with isis?
R:   I think..
I:  almost?
R:  two came to us, a girl and two men, I told them my story but I don't know if they have published it 
I:  with your people around? in general with all?
R:  I have told so many people in Kurdistan
I:  your family? your people?
R:  all
I:  was it daily? was it every day you were talking about it?
R:  no I didn't do it every day ,It was like every 9-10  days. 
I: With who did you talk about it? family?
R: sister,  we went to a governmental department and we talked about it.
I: have you talked about it with friends and family?
R: Yes, …………………... 
I: Have you discussed your story with the doctor?
R: yes,doctor Na gham,German.I have told her my entire story
I: have you spoken with the social worker?
R: Who?
I:  those who work here
R: I can't remember
I: social worker like Mrs Petra.  she works here, she is responsible for you.
R:  yes I have told her my story..suzana ..
I: Have you spoken with the media?
R: no
I: lawyer?
R:  lawyer? no.
I: police?
R:  no
I:  other?
R:  only in Kurdistan, we have spoken with many but they have never revealed our conversation, we have talked about what we have been through, they wanted to know our story .
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I:   since you came to Germany, how often have you sort information about what you talked about during what happened with Isis?
R:  there was a girl who came to us, I don't remember her name, she came and she recorded our story, and two other yazidis came we have told them our story.
I:  our question was,  how many times have you sort information about what is happening in Iraq, what did Isis do and what are they doing now, news? how many times per week?
R:  on the news, I don't know Arabic but I hear that they have taken Mosul and tal afar and baaj. 
I:How often have you done that?  is it every day?
R: no, I see it everyday and My brother-in-law also brings us news. 
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: And why do you seek these information?
R:  for example when we hear the news we want our voice to be heard, and what we have experienced.
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I:  where do you get the information from? friends or family or internet or radio? where do you get the news about Iraq from?
R:  no, for instance my brother-in-law sometimes tells us
I: internet? Facebook?
R:  we see on Facebook
I: other websites on the internet?
R:  sometimes my son says this happened and that happened.
I: radio or newspaper
R:  I see all on Facebook, my son knows German language
R:And Arabic too
R: he understands both.
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: How do you communicate with your people? WhatsApp or? how do you talk with each other?
R: sometimes we use Facebook to talk to each other
I: WhatsApp?
R: yes
I:  do you ask other families about someone?
R: yes
I: messages or phone calls
R:  phone calls
I: newspaper?
R: no 
I:We will have 5 minutes break.
R: I know I have caused you some headache. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: We have reached the last part of our interview,we  want you to talk about your experience when we you were with Isis,About the torture, and if you want to skip some parts, you don't have to talk about it. if it's hard for you you don't have to mention it?
R: I will talk about everything that I have seen and will not leave a detail aside.they take girls for themselves, 10 year old or 9 year old,women similar to my age, they even took the toddlers.
I: What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with Isis?
R:  they used to take daughters and sons that belonged to other women, they took them for themselves, they took the boys and sold them, they took the woman for themselves, strip them out of their clothes,  we have heard them weep,we have seen everything. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: What can you tell us about your escape?
R:  I escaped and came to a Kurdistan, when I came I have seen no one but my mother-in-law, no one and nothing. I didn't see any of my children, I didn't see my husband, I didn't see my brothers in law nor my daughters, I didn't see anyone. 4 daughters of mine,It was really hard.
I:  how long did you spend in captivity?
R:  how many months?
R: 9 months 
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: How has your experience of violence by Isis affected your health?
R:  we have slept on the floor  the entire time using our shoes as a pillow, our food.. our lunch was at 4 p.m.,  a spoon of rice and a spoon of beans, in the morning they gave us a loaf of bread and 1 cucumber or a tomato, and if our children were asleep, they wouldn't give them food.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: This experience of violence with isis that you had, how did it affect your health?
R:  I think they were putting drugs in the water, we couldn't sit, We had always  to lie back.
I: How about now, how's your health?
R:  sometimes it's not good sometimes I have headaches, my hands hurt my legs hurt, entire body hurts.
I:  this bad experience that you faced with Isis, how much did it  harm your health? extremely? moderate? normal?
R: we have  been through horrible things. we always had to lie down on the floor,We were always dizzy, our children were taken, They have  constantly taken our children ,Women, girls, they took them constantly  for themselves.
I:  can you say that the experience of violence you have faced has affected your health extremely?
R: yes, we have seen a lot of things. 
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: I will read you some symptoms as an effect of the violence and you have to tell me how strong it is?
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I:  currently, how much of pain you have?
R:  I have constant pain, I feel pain now but I try to stand on my feet, I have three children I can't afford not to move.
I: how strong is your pain?
R: how strong? as storng as you can imagine. I told the social service that I have to go to the doctor, I went to many doctors and expose myself to machine, and the doctor said I don't have anything.
I: how much do you feel you have pain?
R:  I tell myself if I die I'm not better than my daughters, or my children ,I do not take care of myself.
R: If it wasn't my these three children I am sure I would have died way before.I don't take care of myself.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: You feel any numbness or feeling like paralysed in your skin?
R:  sometimes I feel like my hand is cold but I know it's because of what happened with children and family.
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I:  do you have any problems with movement, like you feel you cannot walk?
R: I tell myself that I am fine and I can move but then my knees start to shake, I don't feel well, my entire body is weak.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I:  do you feel like you're dizzy or shaking?
R:  I feel dizzy all the time, my legs hurt sometimes, you know my children were very good and worthy,If I tell you now about them you might think to yourself that I am lying, they were beautiful and smart and very good at school and healthy, because of constant thinking about them and Isis, I mean we have been through horrible things with Isis.
I: Have you ever felt like you're about to faint?
R:  yes when I feel dizzy, but now I see sometimes I am well, sometimes not.. but I feel like my blood pressure goes high sometimes and I feel nervous and angry, I really get sick.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I:  because sometimes that your eyes are blurry and you cannot see well?
R: i feel like my breath is getting tight,i feel pain most of the time,my blood pressure elevates,i feel dizzy,my eyes dry,im very sick.
I: but you see well with your eyes?
R: yes i do.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: your breathing is ok? do you have any troubles?
R: yes a lot
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: dizziness?
R: i feel dizzy and my eyes hurt,headache,entire body.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: do you have any heart complaints? shaking heat?
R: yes sometimes,doesnt go away from my mind.
I:fast heart beating? 
R: yes a lot
R: since i was a girl and after getting married,since 25 years,i was a healthy person,i have never went to the doctor,i gave birth to 12 children and i have never went to the doctor,but after our experience,my children went to the doctor and i.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: do you have any problems like diarrhea or nausea?
R: no
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I: other health problems we haven't mentioned?
R: i eat,i can't say that i don't eat,but hardly.
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I:  these  symptoms you have mentioned before, what do you think is the reason?
R:  I didn't have any pain, it is all related to my children and husband.
R; Do you know sister, because of this horrible foods and The Killing and the suicide of our children because of them, and The Separation of many people, and Infants and toddlers and kids were separated from their mothers, these images always appear in front of any person.
R: 1000 sister like yourselves came and told me” we are amazed  how you are still sane,How you're so strong and didn't go crazy” 
R: God helped us in a way to to remain sane and not go crazy.
I:  you are so strong, you had strength and you you're capable of going through this.
R:  I really thank Germany from the bottom of my heart for what they have done for us, if it wasn't for them, we wouldn't have survived by now.
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: what do you think? 
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: The experience of violence with Isis, these symptoms you mentioned, psychological health retreated,why did it happen?
R: Yes my psychological health treated strongly, even when a person is young, each one who has been through this experience would have gone crazy by now but I was strong enough to stand still.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think that your pain is physical?
R:  100% my pain comes from grieving over my children, Not from other phone, for example: I didn't have pain I wasn't dizzy, I had nothing.
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: What do you think, this word that I'm using is similar to witchcraft,Do you think this thing that you went through I had anything to do with witchcraft?
R: no
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I:it's a religious thing?
R: no 
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: This experience of violence you have been through, how is your relation with other people? relationship?
R:  it's like before,  I am still like before and my pain is hidden in my stomach (inside). 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: And this experience that you have been through, how did affect your relation with the yazidi community?
R:  these things that I have been through and seen in the yazidi  houses, I have not forgotten about yazidi values, how they took the woman was really hard.
I: What I mean is do you feel like the yazidi  community has helped you through this phase?
R: No they haven't, the entire yazidi community is here but no one came for help. and I would also like for my voice to be heard by the yazidi community.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: What do you think, is it extremely that they didn't help you or not extremely?
R:  no one from the yazidis came for help, no one of them, Not even €1 for my little son.
I: So do you feel like you will not accept the yazidi community?
R:  I do accept them, after all we are all yazidis, but I was always hoping that they will look after the mother of jeylan and rezan. 
*jeylan and rezan are the respondent’s children.
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: did the experience of violence by Isis affect your faith?
R: no
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I:Did it strengthen it or weaken it?
R: Similar as before.nothing. 
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: How do you cope with the effects you mentioned before from the Isis violence?
R:  I think about everything, then I try to not think about it, but I cannot forget my daughters and sons they are always in my mind. 
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: To improve yourself and become better, what do you do?
R:  I don't believe, it's always become stronger, my pain my movement problems increase, when I see people same my son’s age on Facebook getting married I cry a lot. And when I see a girl  similar to my daughter's age getting married, I feel this terrible heartache.
I:  What do you think you can do to become better? to help you and become better?
R:  for example many have tried to help me, but these girls and boys will not leave my mind. 
I: I understand. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now I'm going to mention things, and you have to tell me if they are helping you, you say yes or no.
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I:  what do you think, does believing in the yazidi religion gives you strength or your family?
R:  totally yazidi Faith, my daughter's killed themselves for the yazidi faith.
I: So do  you think that your belief is strong?
R: yes 
I: But you don't believe in the yazidi community?
R:  I do believe. but I always had hope that they will look after me. and I want you to have my voice reached to them.
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I:  believe in your own strength?
R: yes
I: a lot?
R: yes
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: Does it help to do yazidi  prayers? *not sure of the transcription. 
R: yes 
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Does it help to stay alone?
R: stay alone?  both ways I am alone, my children don't stay at home.
I:  you feel it's better to stay alone?
R:  whether I stay alone or among a huge crowd, it's all the same.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Does it help to stay away or avoid any reminders off the experience of violence?
R: A lot of people told me, 100 sisters like yourself told me so, I can not  forget as long as I live, and there's this woman Monica, she comes by, She shows us paintings, we make blankets, we also do hand embroidery with a needle,She also says like others that we will forget about it by getting busy with these things. 
I: Does it help?
R:  she helps us a lot, she tries to make us happy, she cries with us.
I:  does she come once a week?
R: no,  every four days.
I: So this thing doesn't help.
R:  she does help us, but whatever we do it's like our heart is always going to be  filled with Sadness.
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Does it help to talk with others about what you've been through?
R: ---
I:Does it help to talk about this experience?
R:  yes, now I have a headache when I talk about it
I:  so it doesn't help?
R:  no it doesn't
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Does it help if you go to a doctor or a psychotherapist?
R:  it could help if I go to a doctor and he gives me  medicine.
R:  you know these things that I mentioned before and talked about they cause me headache.
I: Is it now?
R:  no not now,in the last 10 days,you know why do I have this headache because I keep on thinking about my children, I wish that I had died and dogs came and dug into my corpse just like my daughters,It's always like that, constant thinking always like that. 
I: Do you want to drink something, it might help with  the headache?
R:  no it's fine, I don't care much about this headache, I'm capable of not drinking water from morning till 4 p.m.
R: I have become stronger.  i'm not thirsty. thanks a lot.
R: I always imagine and say, one day if my daughters and sons were here, if we were invited to a feast or party, they would have worn their Kurdish clothes, this image always comes for my eyes, they would have warm their best clauses and put on makeup, attend weddings and  dance, my daughters would have completed their house chores and then go to school, my sons as well. my kitchen was for example  the same size as this one here, they would have sat all around me,Now I see myself all alone sitting eating breakfast, it is really hard for me. It's really hard because before it was a full house all around me and all of them were young, and now only these three.
I:But you have people around you here too.
R:  yes but it does not help my heart.  for instance: we have built this huge house and I have always thought this room would be for rezan, And this room is for barzan, and I had four daughters, three of them were married and the fourth was nine years old, she's married now. 
I: 3 of your sons are here right?
R: yes 3 ,One is this small the other is the small.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I:  does it help to seek help within the yazidi community?
R:  I really would like to thank you for helping me, you have helped me more than the yazidi community. the yazidi community has done nothing for me, the voice of rezan and jeylan have been spread  around the world, and on Facebook, perhaps you have seen them on Facebook pages but you did not recognise them. 
I: So they did not help you?
R:  so far they did not,  only one yazidi came and asked us if you need any help,his name was Khalaf,He came with his wife and brought us things and came to check on us. but no one else.
I: Did it help to speak with him?
R: a lot, we have felt happy and comfortable when we  met, they came 2 times  with his wife.
R: another two came, they did not offer any help they just  talked, we weren't so happy to meet them. 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you have any other things that might help you?
R: I just want you to reach my voice to the yazidi community. 
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Do you have any medication?
R: no
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I:  have you went to a psychologist?
R:  I went and told him that I have pain, she was a woman, she said you don't have anything.
I: do you recognise the word psychologist?
R: no
I:  you go to doctor and talk about your problems. have you went there?
R: no
R:  but I just want my voice to be heard.
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
I: In a group,like group therapy.Have you went through group psychotherapy?
R: no
R: I only went to Dr.Nagham  back in Iraq.
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Some people go to traditional and religious houses, have you went to a place like that here?
R: no
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I:  natural medicine
R:  I haven't taken any medicine. I went to the doctor once and he said I have to drink a lot of water and gives me these tablets, they are painkillers for my headache.
I: Then you have to drink a lot of water
R:  I can't.
I: try it it's really important to drink water.
R: I swear I can't, it's an old habit since I was home.
R:  I was really well and healthy before, I have worked night and day with no pain, but after this experience,i have been going through this pain.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I:  how much did it help with the doctor
R: As I told you he just told me to drink water, and gave me the pills.
I: did it help?
R:  I have got this pills for my headache, I take them sometimes but I feel like my brain is not completely there. For example when I had this general pain and I went to the doctor and then the doctor said that I don't have anything,He said “your heart is completely healthy,  but it's all in your bones” .
I: So this doctor was a good help or none?
R: I'm still like before.
R: that wasn't useful, I'm still like before. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: The social worker, those who are responsible for you, how many times did they help per day?
R: our supervisors are very good and they help us, but when we went to the doctor and he said that I have nothing and it's all in your bones(deep fear), he said it's not that kind of pain that is located in an organ or place like heart complaints or kidney problems, he said you have nothing like that.You said it's when you look at the pictures of isis and then fear takes control over your body.
I:But this woman helps you a lot?
R: yes she does. 
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: What do you think, at the social worker how does she help always?
R:  Susanna,narin and Monica. They help with things like sewing these blankets, they bring bags, we sometimes do this hand embroidery thing.
I:  Have you once did the hand embroidery for pillow bags too?
R: Yes we have and we put it on  chairs, there were birds on it, Roses and other.
I:  we have talked to Monica on the phone.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I:  is there any professional help you would like to receive but not received it yet?
R:  my sisters in law help me, if it wasn't for them I would be destroyed by now.
I:  do you need any other help but you don't have it?
R: no no other kind of help,-----
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I:  I will tell you now some problems, and you have to tell me how strong you feel about them, you have to tell me if this problem occurred with you  during the past seven days. I mean in the last week.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: What do you say, when you remember it, it brings back feelings.
R:  there's nothing to do around here, when Monica comes and helps us, will you forget about it a little bit with Monica.
I: How often does it occur when you remember this experience with Isis, you have feelings about it in your head.
R: no
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I:  you have any problems at night?
R:  I feel like the night is so long because of the constant thinking about my children, and it becomes hard to sleep.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I:  Other things that let you think about Isis?
R:   many times I see them in my sleep, I see them capturing me I see them taking my children.
I: and other days?
R:   in the day it's fine, but the hardest part is at night.
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I:  do feel like angry?
R:  a lot of times. sister, these things that happened to me have went by.. 
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Do try not to get stressful and angry when you think about it?
R:  when I think about it, I calculate everything. but I try to calm myself down for the sake of my three children. 
I: How for  example?
R:  I swear,  this one.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I:  you think about it but you didn't mean to.
R:  I don't want to think about it but because of my children I do
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I:  sometimes it comes before your eyes and you say this was not real, Like it was like a dream.
R;  it was like a dream, but how can I ----- my children
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: I tried two stay away from anything that reminds me of it?
R:  here or in Iraq
I:  I try to  think less about my children
R: i try to,but  they are part of my heart I don't believe that I will be capable of forgetting them as long as I live, for example are you  married or not
R:  a person will never forget as long as he lives.
R:  a person's children…..husband
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I:  what to have experienced, you have images about it in your head.
R;  yes so many images, not like those that appear on TV,My children always watch tv and i look at it sometimes,  but it appears in my head like watching television
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: You feel defeated
R: As I told you before when my children go to school or weddings, they were around me asking me to hand them something,eating together, I remember all of this, I cannot forget I cannot live, I can not put this image away, even if i try not to think  it would be a little bit, but I cannot forget them completely.
I: Do you feel defeated?
R: no, but I cannot forget them not at all. 
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: I felt strongly about it but I didn't get busy with them.
R:  I get busy around, now sister, I take a shower and then I ask myself why did I shower  while my children’s corpse was eaten by dogs 
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I:  your feelings, you know there are many different kind of feelings among people, Do you feel like your feelings  were kind of paralysed?
R:  I'm still like before, some days I feel like my body is heavy.
I:  do you think that your feelings became stronger or weaker?
R: I'm always like before I always remember it and I will never forget it as long as I live, like now..
I:  do you know the word feeling?
R: yes it's like when you sometimes remember something.
I: Do you think your feelings became stronger or weaker after this experience?
R:  if this hasn't happened to me I would be so happy. I would have been healthy and free of pain.
I: how about your feelings now?
R:  it's stronger now, when I sit I think  when I get busy I get busy with myself
R: Sister, we have been through horrible things. we have been through everything. 
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Sometimes I feel like I am back in captivity? in your head
R: in my head?  what I have been through in captivity I haven't seen anything like that before. 
I: Do feel like sometimes you are back in that jail even though you're here.
R: yes, lot of times I say this happened to us and that happened to us, and they took all of my children from me, and I have nothing left, I tell the social services the entire time and they are always in my mind. 
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: I cannot sleep?
R:  I'm always dizzy,  I sometimes stay up late until 3 or 4 a.m.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I:  sometimes you have strong feelings about it the same as when you were held Captive by Isis?
R: yes
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I:  I try to remove them from my memory
R:  I can't, I wish I could do it but I can't
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I:  it's hard to concentrate
R:  everything is hard
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I:  thinking about it causes you to  sweat, you experience shortness of breath or pounding heart?
R: yes.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Your dream about it?
R:  I Dream a lot about it, And they grab my hand like my daughter.* not sure of the sentence.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: For the last seven days, You take good care of yourself and you feel like your ears are widely open.
R:  yes my ears are widely opened, I cannot say that I'm not normal I am. 
I: So you feel better, when you walk the streets you feel like your ears and your eyes are fully opened.
R: yes 
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: I try not to talk about it
R:I don't want to experience any headache,  I have a terrible headache now, because I talked about it. 
I: We really are sorry for what happened to you, And you can tell us whatever you want.
R:  I have told her everything that I have seen with my eyes.
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I;  thank you very much
R:  thank you very much and thank you for coming here we appreciate it.
I:   3-4 questions more
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Finally can you tell me what was the good and positive things you had in the last two years here in Germany?
R:  I want to thank them very much, we appreciate everything they have done, they have looked after us, they have taken care of us like a mother and a father,They have given us a steady salary, I really appreciate them.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I : How much would you say that this project that brought you here is good for you?
R: this much, since we came to Germany. if only our children were not gone, we would have been so comfortable and happy. it's not like Iraq, we had so many troubles back there and terrible headaches. they didn't provide for us or do anything for us. 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Can you tell me three positive things about this project?
R:  they have done everything good for us, they brought us here which was great, they give us a monthly salary which is great too, they put us in their houses which was great too. they became a family, a mother a father and a brother to us.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I:  what are the three negative things  about this project? not good.
R: we haven't seen any that things about this project. We feel so happy about them and they feel happy about us, they help us a lot.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: What do you think about the future
R:  me and my children
R:  since we came to Germany our future will be better.
I:  Do you have any hope?
R:  I will always think about my children, but I appreciate these women, they put us in houses, they brought us here, they gave us a salary. if we had a mother and a father I don't think they would have done the same. 
I: We have finished the interview.
R:  you are welcome.  I hope you stay for lunch.
I:  thank you very much for your answers, for the images that you showed before, these things will help us a lot to publish this interview.