Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [Each file name has a number. Please put the number here]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Where you working?
R: Yes, we were farming and keeping sheeps.
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R: Ezidi
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
I: What etnic group you are from? I mean is your ethnic group Turk, Arab, Kurd or Ezidi?
R: Ezidi
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: Thanks for your answers. Now we will ask you some more questions.
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: Now in your life, what are your concerns, what your priorities in life are and what you want to do?
R: The only thing is my life is my fimly to come back to me but that have not come.
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What is the most important thing left for you now to rebuild your life?
R: Before me and my husband wanted each other and we could make it. So it was my life to have him and now I want him to arrive here and that’s it. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Generally how do you feel that you have control over your life?
R: We see ourselves strong epecialy we we could freed ourselves from the hands of those and we did not let them to take a negative point on us. We freed ourselves by our strength. "Those" She means ISIS
I: It means a lot?
R: Yes, a lot. I usually say that in spite of they were monsters but we could freed ourselves.
I: But now your are in Germany, how do feel as a human to say your decisins and lead your life. I mean do you think that you are a strong person?
R: Yes, too much.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do think that your future has didden for you?
R: Like what?
I: I mean what you think that you have in future, what life has hidden for you?
R: Life is my husband and it is long period for us. Hopefully some of my family will return to me. She does not undertand completely
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If we say that the situation in Iraq gets better, there will be peace, then do you want to go to Iraq, stay in Germany or go to Kurdistan?
R: I do not want o go back neither Kurdistan nor Iraq. Nothing has left in Kurdistan and Iraq especially we do not have anything in Kurdistan.
I: It means Germany?
R: Yes
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel that Gwermany as it is your country?
R: Yes, we feel. Since two years they are helping us and getting us out of bad circumstaces.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: From zero to four, how much do you feel that your experiences were good in Germany?
R: Till three
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why
R: It is been two years we are here and we have not done any work. So we have not integrated to it yet.
I: Complete it, do you have anything else?
R: No
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If we are saying if as we are only asking and not telling you to go back.
I: If you go back to Kurdistan or Iraq, what do you feel is a lot to go there?
R: It is difficult to go there. I will not go there.
R: Even if it would Kurdistan and Iraq, I would go to Iraq.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: Do you know what does justice mean?
R: No, because there are a lot kinds of justice.
I: Jusice is when someone takes your rights and does bad things to you and you want to get back your rights. When someone tells you justice, what do you think?
R: I think about a lot of things.A lot of things have happened to us and we have seen a lot and a lot of our rights have gone.
I: Can you say it again?
R: I said when we think about our life, we know that our life has gone as well as our honor.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How much is it important for you to have justice, till four?
R: Four 
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: Do you have optimisim to have your rights returned?
R: Yes, I have it.
I: How much
R: Too much
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How much is it important for your from zero to four to have your rightd from those who have done bad things to you?
R: Four
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Why?
R: They have done a lot to us and we want to take our rights.
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who do you feel is countable for that to be punished? Now among ISIS, there leaders, army and children. So for you, are they all equal?
R: No, the leaders. There was a leader taking resposibilty of girls. He was doing bad things to them and then selling them to his friends. So is he good? "Ameer"  literarly means prince but she means the leader
I: You mean he is more countable?
R: Yes
I: Is he the only leader or there are more?
I: No all of them were bad
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: How they should be held accountable, how do feel those who have done bad things to be accountable?
R: Too much punishment. We wish if we could do the same to them but we can not touch them even.
R: Hopefully God wil talk our rights from them.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Do you ever know now that there is other kinds of punishment such they are taking ISIS to courts? Do you more to be done, not only taking to the courts?
R: I want more than that to be done.
I: That kind of of punishment you are saying, do you want to be held in Iraq or other countries?
R: Everywhere. Whenever we go there are some, so we want everywhere.  She means  wherever ISIS are
I: Do you want more about that or that’s all?
R: No
I: Do you know that something is happening such as the world is hearing your voices?
R: If someone wants to tell about the ISIS, other follow up them on that. I do not mean the countries but who are with ISIS. She means when the survivors say the ISIS stories and their reality, some others follow up on them.
I: Now for example your rights have been taken, I mean they have done bad things to them and you have come here. No here do you hear that there is someone to ask about your rights and say these are Ezidis who have been through this and that?
R: No
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is there possibility to forgive those ISIS?
R: No
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: If we say that you will forgive them, what should should happen first?
R: Nothing
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
I: How much is it important from zero to four for you to know that what happened during the conflict between ISIS and Iraq, between ISIS and I do not know who in general? Do you see for information to know what is happening?
R: I want to know what they have done to Ezidis families and those children, to four?
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How much is it important from zero to four for you to know that the world be aware of that?
R: Four
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it to you  from zero to four to know that the next gernerations know what happened to you?
R: Four 
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why do you want to know that?
R: Because a lot has happened for example children from 3 to 7, we do not know what happened to them. A lot of families displaced from Mosul and probably there are children among them but we do not know. She means probably there Ezidi children among Muslim families who have displaced from Mosul.
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: In your opinion what should be done to let those people to know what happened?
R: People already know what happened, even the kids between 3-4 to 7 when they survive they know what happened.
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Do you know that does committee mean? Committee which has people in?
R: Yes I know
I: Have you ever heard that a committee in Iraq is called truth?
R: No I have not heard.
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: That is a committee which government makes and sends to see that ISIS have done, what they jave not, what are the crimes of ISIS and then investigates. She asks you that in your opoinoin is that enough for you to know that people know what happened and what did not. Is that committee enough?
R: Yes, too much
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: In general what is your opinion what should be done for the victims from Ezidis? What should be done?
R: Support then and those who are still in Iraq and those who are captives as they are alive such as my sister, some elders and girls like us. We want them to get support because some of them survive by 20000$ some of them by 30000$. So as  refugees where will they get that money?
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: Specifically, what should be done for Ezidis, not victims but Ezidis in specific?
R: We want they get support as well and to be dealt as others and all the time genocides to be conducted on them. So we want them to get support and be as others are in other countries.
I: In your opinion what should be done?
R: In my opinion something like human rights for woman and the genocide to be well known and genocides get stopped on them from now on. She means what has happened to Ezidis is a genocide and should be known by others to give rights to the Ezidis.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Do you feel that you are a victim of ISIS?
R: Yes too much
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why do you feel that way?
R: It was difficlut. We did not know if the planes would kill me by airstrike they would kill me or I mske suicide. I did not know which of the three would be. We think a lot about and even can not sleep sometimes. We feel a lot happened to us and nightmare comes to us and so for this reason.
I: How long you were with ISIS.
R: Four months and half.
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
I: Now on Iraq, we will ask you something.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: In your opinion, do you feel that there will be peace in Iraq? Do you know that peace means, it is when the war ends.
R: Perhaps because a lot of military have gone there.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you know what middle east is? Arab countries such as Egypt and Sudan. Do you know there is peace?
R: No
I: At all?
R: No because ISIS were from Arab countries.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What should be done to build peace in Iraq? Now there is no peace. So what should be done in order there will be peace?
R: When they get ISIS out of there, it will be fine.
I: Only ISIS to be out. Is there anything else?
R: No there is not beccaue it was fine before as there were no ISIS.
I: Do you mean it was good when ISIS were not there or even it was not good.
R: It was good somehow when ISIS were not there.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: How do feel about the current military compaign against ISISmin Iraq? Do you feel that military will be able to get ISIS out?
R: Hopefully, they will as till now they are getting them out. If countries help them, they will get them out.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: How do feel to be done for Ezidis to be protected and some other people in Iraq?
R: I do not know. A lot of things, get rid of ISIS first from Iraq. Then to do something for them in Iraq.
I: What to do for them in Iraq?
R: For example to make them as others, not less than others and they do not do anything bad to any one. She means to let Ezidis as equal as all others in Iraq, not less than them.
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you have come to Germany, how many times you have shared your experinces? Your experinces with ISIS?
R: Such as what?
I: When you sit with others and say this happened to me, the experience. How many times you have shared?
R: With me only?
I: Not only with you but with friends, doctors?
R: Many times.
I: Too many. Can I say how many per week? Once per week?
R: No not once per week. When one of our friends survive, we talk about that.
I: No I mean about you.
R: Two or three times. She still does not understand the questions correctly
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Who do you talk to, you and your family? Do you talk about your experiences with ISIS to them?
R: I do know a family.
I: Friends?
R: I have friends. 
I: If you do not want to answer it is fine or if you want to take rest you can.
R: No it is fine.
I: Do you talk to doctors?
R: Yes I talk to them.
I: Does social worker know?
R: Yes
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
I: Have ever talked to TVs or radios?
R: No
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
I: Lawyer?
R: No.
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
I: Police?
R: Yes in Iraq and genocide court as well.
I: On Facebook?
R: No                                     The interpreter mentions the family again but the respondent says that does not have a family.
I: When you communicated to the police, did ask go to them or they come to you?
R: The day that we survived, they did let us to enter Kurdistan before investigating us.
I: You mean police came to you?
R: Yes, we arrived and the check point took us and said that we have to go to the police officer for giving the statement. After that, we went to the genocide court for taking our blood examines for keeing our story and be aware of our missing family members.
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
I: When you gave your information to the police, do you know what will happen to them?
R: They how did you survive.
I: Why they have taken your information?
R: They said how you survived, who have you seen, who were familiar ISIS, how many of your family are captives, how many are killed and how many have survived.
I: What they will do with that information then? Do you know?
R: No I do not know. Like that they have taken our statement.
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Since the police spoke to you, did they see you after that or it was only first time?
R: No but only I was going to the genocide court three days.
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Sine you have come to Germany, have you ever wriiten your experiences on Facebook, with you etc.
R: Never. None one of us has done except Akhlas.
I: I mean about your experience.
R: No
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you have come to Germany, how often you seek information on what is happening in Iraq, I mean between Iraq and ISIS or what ISIS are doing?
R: Never
I: Now you are not following up the news?
R: No I want to forget about it.
I: Do you hear news aboutyour family?
R: We know that two of my brothers are alive till now but we know the younger that this one is in Syria but do not know where exactly and the one who we were in contact with, it is been 6 months we can not contact him. We know that he is with ISIS and we ask about him continuously. She refers to a kid when she says "younger than this one"
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: You said that you get this information from your relaytives and friends in Iraq, right?
R: Yes
I: Do you seek on Facebook?
R: Know
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: When you want to seek information you talk to your relatives and friends, right? On Whatsaap and telephone, right?
R: Yes 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: Now we want to ask questions about your experience with ISIS and how did that experience affect you and your life.
I: If you do not want to answer you can say that you cannot answer, ok?
R: Ok
I: And if you felt unconfortable, you can say it and take a pause.
R: Ok
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: Now what can you tell us about your experiences with ISIS?
R: A lot of things.
I: How long you were under their hands?
R: Four and half months I was under their hands.
R: There were a lot of their crimes.
I: What is your village name?
R: Mine in Iraq is Khocho.
I: Then?
R: Then, they moved us from Kocho to Sinjar and put us in a big building. At 10:00 pm they separated us from our mothers in four buses and took us to Mosl. They put us in a big Christian house which cosited of 3 floors. They put us in the middle floor and ISIS were in the underneath floor with some Ezidis but we did not know there were Ezidis in that floor. They put us that night there and their leaders came to us. They picked up three grils among us for them. Then they separated us to two parts in the same house. The wok up at 4:00 am the part that I was in and put us in a bus. We were 115 girls when they took us to Syria to Raqa in a forest in a wedding hall. There trees and water around and there were other Ezidi girls who have been taken there on 3 August as you know when the genocide has been conducted on Sinjar after ISIS entered Iraq. On 15 August, they caught us in the village. We had been moved to Raqa and at 9:00 pm the leader with 60 persons came to us. They beat us by sticks and took out 5-6 girls with them. I remained 17 days among my friend and one night they came and took me and one from our village as well. They bought us, they were 10 ISIS and they bought 2 of us. They dragged me when my two sisters were with me and then they fell me on the stips. They broke my leg and took me to the electrical generator to put me on the electricity right here in my arm. They put us on the electicty in order to take us easily to the cars. They were taking us by force. They put me and my friend to the car after paying for us. On our way, another car came and got me out from the car and separated me from my friend. They took to house where there 3 ISIS and put me in a rood and closed the door. After that they knew that my leg was broken and told me to clean the house. In the house there were bombs and many staff for fighting in the room. At morning I threw myself on a window as the house was on floor. 3 fuards were at the gate and the one who with me was asleep and I did not let him to know when I escaped through that window. They did know but I could not walk on my broken leg which was not on gypsum (Under healing). They run after me and I crawled because I could not walk. They shot me but did not hit me. I knocked a door and there was a woman and has a daughter as same as my age and she has a son as well. I asked her to help me after opening the door. They put me in their house for 1 month and 15 days and during that period I could not go anywhere because of my leg. After passing 1 month and 15 days, the ISIS who bought me was her son-in-law but she did not know about it. She did not know that I run from him and I was always hiding myself in the house. The woman told me once that they were not ISIS but ISIS forced them to be ISIS and even she told me that ISIS took her daughter. Some people informed ISIS that I am in her house and her son-in-law came and took me to his wife. He took us to a new location called Tal-Abyad near Turkish border. We remained 15 days in Tal-Abyad in their house which was 3 floors and then a woman came and said that also bought a girl and she is in one of floors in the same house. One night, they told us that they will teach us how to pray and teach the Quran. Before teaching, the plane bombed there and we run from there. They took us with cars to a water bridge where we stayed till the evening. After 2 days they took us to Raqa in a different house. 3 of my village were also with the same leader and once I told the leader to give me the phone to call me family. I called my uncle and told them where I was and if they send a person close I would be able to recuse myself. So they told me that would give a smuggler number called Abu Shujah. They gave me his number and I spoke to him. Abu Shujah was in Kurdistan but he had friends in Syria. I escaped by myself. They gave us sleeping pills keeping us asleep so we would not able to escape. So I called Abu Shujah and he told me if I could escape from the leader's house at 1:00 pm so Abu Shujah's friends could take me to the border. I freed 3 of friends as well because I gave sleeping pills to ISIS and called my friends for escaping together. The leader's wife locked the door when she went to see the doctor but we broke the locker by a knife and then scaped. We hired a taxi to take us somewhere. 2 persons came and took us to Minbij and from Minbij to Turkish border. At 7:00 am we reached to Kurdistan. 
I: How long you stayed in Kurdistan before coming to Germany?
R: I survived on 1th January 2015 and 20th June I came to Germany. 
I: Do you have anything else to tell us?
R: Like what?
I: Anything?
R: I was thinking to ask why some can request their families to her and some cannot?
I: You mean your husband to come her on the basis of request?
R: Yes
I: Where is your husband? Is he in Kurdistan in Duhok?
R: Yes
I: In the camps?
R: Yes
I: It is something complicated as there a lot requesting their families.
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: We want to ask you some other questions about your health after catching you by ISIS and doing bad things to you.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: After you have been caught and doing bad things to you and after you have come to Germany, how do you feel that bad thing has affected your health?
R: Too much. Honestly after moving here, I have become comfortable somehow. 
I: Now from zero to four how you would say your health is?
R: Four
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now I will tell the syptoms on each if you feel of not, ok?
R: Ok
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: What disease you have now?
R: I do not have any disease.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you ever feel that you itch your body?
R: No
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you ever feel that your movements are heavy which means you are not able to walk, your arm, your legs?
R: No but somehow my leg is not quite fine.
I: How much from zero to four.
R: I have to see the doctors each month especially when it gets cold I cannot walk because of it.
I: Can I say 2?
R: Yes
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you ever feel that you have fainting?
R: No
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Do you have blurred vision, hearing impairments etc?
R: No I am good
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you ever feel of short breathing?
R: No
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you feel od dizziness?
R: No and I have had never felt dizzy.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Your hearth, does is hurt or beat fast?
R: No
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Does your stomach hurt you, nausea etc?
R: No but here hurts me because of my leg.
I: Your back as well?
R: Yes right here and I can standstill it hurts and even when it gets cold.
I: How much does it hurt you?
R: Too much but I am taking analgestic pills and we I stopped taking them, it starts hurting again.
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I: Do you have any other diseases?
R: No
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: How do you explain that things you have mentioned such as leg aches?
R: How? She does not understand.                   
I: Now you said that your leg broken when you escaped, so except that what do you have to tell?
R: That’s all
I: Do you have any other aches?
R: No
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: We will tell you the options and aslo you can tell from zero to four so how those things have impact on you?
R: How? She does not undertand.
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Do you feel that you are fine psychologically? You cab say from zero to four
R: I am tired
I: How do you feel that bothers you?
R: Three
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: How do you feel that you have a current disease after ISIS, from zero to four?
R: I do not feel but only this. Refers to what she mentions before.                        
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you ever feel that what happened to have a relation to God or God may make punishment for them? Do you feel that it is related to the religion?
R: I did understand.
I: How important is it to you, there will be options? Do you ever feel that what happened is related to God? Even the interpreter does not get the question very well.
R: No. God did not tell them to do such things.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How does your experiences with ISIS affect your relationship with people? Did it affect?
R: No
I: Did it affect your relationship with your relatives and friends?
R: Yes they know. 
I: Are they with you as before
R: Yes they are.
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: How did your experience with ISIS affect your life in the Ezidi community? After bad things, has your life been changed in the Ezidi commuity?
R: No it is as before.
I: Do you feel that the Ezidi community is supportive with you? Do they stand with you psychologically? Do you feel that you’re a part of Ezidi community or you have been away from? It is not quite understandable 
R: Yes 
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Did that bad experience with ISIS affect your faith, your faith with your religion?
R: No it is as before.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: When you want to forget things, what do you do for yourself?
R: Everyting, I go school, help my sister and I work in the house forget herself.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: After you leg broke, what do you do to get it comfortable?
R: I keep it warm. I wear sacks when it is cold.
I: Do you take pills?
R: Yes when it hurts I take pills. They are bad as they are analgestic because it hurts me when I stop taking them.
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now also there are options, you can say how much these things help you such forgetting yourself, ok?
R: Ok
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Do you ever feel that others help you?
R: Yes
I: How much from zero to four?
R: Three
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe in yourself? Do you have faith in yourself?
R: Yes
I: How much
R: Why not?
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: Do you pray?
R: I always pray
I: Do you feel comfortable?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Four
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: It is better for you to spend your time alone? Do you feel comfortable?
R: Yes
I: How much
R: Three
I: How much do you want to spend your time alone?
R: I do not want. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Can you avoid the things which happened to you from your mind?
R: Yes
I: Is that better for you?
R: Yes three    She does not undersand correctly
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you like to share your experience with ISIS with others?
R: No
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Do you want to see the psychologists?
R: I have a psychologist.
I: How much is it good for you?
R: That psycholodist also talks about things for us and we forget ourselves.
I: How much is that good?
R: Four. Hopefully we will not need more.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Do you ask help from Ezidis? How much do you ask help from them?
R: From who?
I: From Ezidis
R: Too much
I: How do like them to be supportive with you and stand with you?
R: Three
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do have other things to forget youself with? There some women draw, exercise to forget themselves. Do you do such things?
R: How? Yes we do things sometimes such as sewing things and making sacks with knitting.
I: Do you do it now?
R: Yes
I: How much does it help when you sew?
R: Four
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: Now again we will give some options to know if you have done those things or not.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Are you taking medicines such as for sleeping or for mental?
R: No
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: You said that you see the psychologist, right?
R: Yes we have our psychologist.
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Do you speak alone or in groups? I mean you and psychologist only or a group?
R: Me, the interpreter and the psychologist.
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Now we have Shekh in Islam. You what is Shekh, right?
R: Sheck?
I: Mosque's Shekh
R: Yes
I: Do you have Shekh?
R: Yes Baba Shekh. Ezidi highest religious leader.
I: Have ever gone to the Skekh or Lalish?
R: Yes I have
I: Have you after ISIS?
R: Yes we visited there three times when we survived.
I: Was that good?
R: Yes too much. Whenever we go to our Lalish, we feel comfortable automatically.
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Have you ever had the herbal medicine? Do you know what herbal medicine is? It is like tea, do you feel comfortable wen you have it?
R: No
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Is there a social worker?
R: Yes 
I: Does she help help?
R: Yes too much
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Do you go to doctors, not psychologists?
R: Yes when we feel sick.
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much does it help?
R: Too much
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: With your psychologist, do you feel comfortable?
R: Yes, four
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: Now what we have mentioned to you such as doctors, social workers etc. What do you think is better than that?
R: There is not better, they are so good for us.
I: Can you tell us how?
R: They support us in everything such as doctors, psychologists, social workers when they are finding jobs for us after school and pediatrician.
I: Now when you see the psychologist, what do think is comforting you better?
R: When the psychologist speaks to us, says everything and we understand that it is for our life. We feel so comfortable.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: What kind of support you think is good but you have noit received yet? Do you need more help?
R: No I do not need more that this.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Since a week till now, I will again tell you the options. When someone goes through bad things, some of those things happen to them. So when we I tell then, you can tell me how much, ok?
R: Ok
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: Anything happens that remind you of something else?
R: No
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do have troubles in sleeping?
R: yes, three
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Other things make you think about it?
R: No
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you feel angry?
R: No
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Do you prevent yourself of thinking about it? Do you feel upset?
R: No I do not get upset.
I: Do you feel when you think about it you get upset?
R: Yes. She does not understand      
I: Which one? When you think you get upset?
R: Yes           
I: How much you do this, a lot?
R: No, not a lot.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Did you ever think about but you did not want to? I mean it came surprisingly.
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Three
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Do you ever feel that things happen to you which you think as they are not real?
R: Yes but not too much
I: Two?
R: Two
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: When things come to your mind, do you get away from them? You do not get away?
R: No
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do pictures come to your mind?
R: Somehow
I: One?  
R: Yes
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Do you ever feel that you get startled? Do you have worries?
R: During sleeping sometimes.
I: How much?
R: Too much. When I am sleeping and have a drean, I get startled.
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try not to think about it?
R: Yes
I: Too much or little.
R: Too much
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: You know what you saw bad things, do you feel that you do not want to deal with that for example what happened and what did not? It is not understandable
R: No
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: When you feel about it, do you feel tinkling? Do you know that tinkling means?
R: Shaking?
I: No when you feel worried you tinkle?
R: No
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Do you ever feel when you think about it as you are in it? For example when you think about something, you feel as you are in it.
R: No
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have troubles in sleeping?
R: No
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Do you feel about it as waves of water?
R: No
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you like to remove it from you memory?
R: Yes
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you have troubles in concentrating, concentrating on things?
R: No
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: when that bad experience comes to your mind, does your heart pound, or get trouble breathing and staff like that?
R: No
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you see nightmares about it?
R: Yes too much
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel watchful?
R: No but I see a lot of dreams.
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Did you try not to talk about it?
R: No
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Since two years till now in Germany, can you tell us what the positive experience is for you in Germany?
R: Good one is they freed us from ISIS to here.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: The current project of Ezidi women who came to Germany, how much you are satisfied with it?
R: Too much
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Tell me three good reasons about this project in your opinion?
R: First one is it was really good that they have brought those women to here, and all were in need of psychological aid and the third one is they were in need of doctors as they were getting diseases from ISIS. They supported them too much.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: In your opinion what is the negative things in this project?
R: No I have not heard anyting bad about it. Now some of them that their responsibles are not good but we have not seen anything bad with ours.
I: If there are anything bad you would like to say about it, it is fine.
R: Not there is not. We are thankful for it.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: This the last question, what gives you hope in future? In your future, where did your hope come from?
R: My hope! Like what?
I: Like your expectations. What do you think that future has hidden for you?
R: I have hope for joining with my family. Hopefully we will join.
I: Thanks for your answers, we have done the interview and if you have questions you can ask
R: No, thank you.