Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [026]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R: I am 26. 
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: You said you are married, right?
R: Yes. 
I: And you husband is in Iraq? 
R: Yes, he is in Iraq, I have seven children. 
I: You have seven children. 
R: My husband was hit by a car, he had a surgical operation. He is in pain now.
I: Is he alive now?
R: Yes thanks God.  
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Can you read and write?
R: No, I can't. 
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Have you gone to any school?
R: I have never gone to school in Iraq.
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Now do you go to language school? 
R: Sometimes, I go as our school is near here, it is in the other room. Our teacher comes twice a week, but I don’t often go because I don’t understand. 
I: I understand you, sometimes you go and sometimes you don’t and you school is in the other room. 
R: Yes, it is here. 
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Do you do any job for making money?
R: No. I don’t do any job; I only want to take care of my seven children. 
I: How old areyour kids?
R: The boy is ten, the girl is 8, the other one is 6 and so on. I have twin girls who are 4. 
I: Are they identical?
R: No, one of them is brunette and the other one blonde. I have a boy who is 3, I was pregenant when I was captured by ISIS. 
I: Is he the youngest one?
R: Yes. 
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Now do you want to do a job?
R: No, I can't do anything. I have young kids, the Germans help me becuase I have young kids. Two of them are in the school and one of them is in the kindergarten. 
I: If your kids grow up, are you going to work in the future?
R: Yes, if that requires me to do for living, I will. 
I: What kind of jobs are you willing to do?
R: First, I want to go to school first. 
I: So you don’t mean a school for languages, you mean a real school?
R: Yes, I want to go to school first to learn reading and writing well because learning a language is very important. Then I will seek for a job. 
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before ISIS, were you doing any job in Iraq?
R: No. Only my husband worked. 
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: what is your religion?
R: I am Yazidi, Peacock Angel
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: Where are you coming from?
R: I am coming from Shingal, Hababi. 
I: Are you Turk, Arab, or Yazidi?
R: Yazidi. 
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What are you priorities in life? What do you think about the most? 
R: Only taking care of my kids in a safe place, we escaped from war, we want to live safely, I always think about it and I have a headache because of that. 
I: Anything else?
R: There are a lot of things, thinking about them never ends. We always think about them, we even check fscebook to see what the updates are. 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: Now what do you need to start a new life?
R: We want to forget, thanks God my children are by me, and thanks God my husband is alive, the situation of Yazidi people is terrible, no one is around me, there are even people who live in worse situation. 
I: So you are saying that you need your husband back to start your life from the beginning? 
R: If he comes here so we can start a new life and go to school. We want this, but they won't bring my husband. 
I: Where exactly is he in Iraq? 
R: in Kurdistan?
I: Where exactly?
R: Khanke.
I: Is that town that is near Duhok? 
R: Yes. 
I: What does he do there? IS he living in tents?
R: He doesn’t work, yes he lives in tents. 
I: Have you ever gone back to Iraq?
R: Yes, once, I took three of my kids. I am always uncomfortable because he wants to see our kids but I only could take three of them with me. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Tell me how do you feel? Are you a decisive person? Can you make decisions in your life? How much control do you have about your life?
R: How?
I: Are you aware of yourself that you can make your decision?
R: Well, my thoughts are not clear. I always have a headache. It is better for make my own decision. 
I: I understand you. How much do you think you have control, Zero is nothing while four is that you have a full control?
R: 4 is better.
I: Yes four is better, but what do you feel?
R: I think I am good. 
I: This means that you have a weak person, this is for a bit better, and this is for good, and this is for best. So tell me how much do you think you are in control in your life?
R: I am very weak. 
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think the future holds for you?
R: I have a future here, my kids are here, my husband is alive.
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation improves in Iraq, would you rather live in Kurdistan, stay in Germany, or go to a different country?
R: I would rather stay in Germany, Iraq will never be the same.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
I: Why? 
R: Many cities were destroyed, Musol is destroyed and Shingal was ruined. Our house was totally demolished. They bombed it, they damaged everything. 
I: DO you have any conditions to return to Iraq? Or you always want to stay in Germany? 
R: I always want to stay in Germany; I don’t want to go to Iraq because there is no life in Iraq. My mother, sister and father are in Iraq. 
I: So your family is there now?
R: My dad was jailed too. 
I: So now your dad is not there with you? 
R: No, he was released. 
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel that Germany is your country? How much a lot or little? 
R: Nowhere is like man's homeland, but here is safe. 
I: How much do you feel? How much do you feel that Germany is your country? A lot, in between, or little?
R: Not much. Nowhere feels like home. It is better to have your family beside you.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: How do you judge your experience in Germany? Was it good or bad? How do you feel about your kife here in Germany?
R: It is good because my kids are in schools and kindergarten. There was nothing in Iraq, I want to saty in Germany. I do want my husband by me here; I also want my mother and sister by my side. 
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to return? 
R: How?
I: What are your conditions to return to Iraq?
R: To return?
I: Yes. Now you don’t want to return because there is ISIS, but what do you need to feel safe to return to Iraq?
R: If the situation gets better in Iraq and all my family is there, I can go back there for a visit then come back here, I don’t want to stay there because we suffered a lot there. 
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: Do you know what does justice mean? Justice is when someone takes your rights and then you get your rights back and they get punished. Do you understand it? When you hear the word Justice, what do you think? 
R: I have lost my rights, I can't get my rights back.
I: Do you think that there is justice in this world?
R: Yes, there is here. 
I: Why do you feel that there is justice in the world?
R: Because there is justice in Germany, but justice doesn’t exist in Iraq. In Iraq, no one gets punished for committing crimes. 
I: Do you think that there will be justice in Iraq in the future?
R: I don’t know. 
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for to you to get justice?
R: Very much.
I: Why?
R: My kids suffered a lot, and they were starving anf suffering in Syria. All of them spent nights with no food. 
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: Do you hold hopes that you will ever get justice? You can stop if you want, you can go and take a rest. 
R: It is OK; it is because when I think about my children I get sad. 
I: Do you hold hopes that you will ever get justice? 
R: God will get my rights back. 
I: Are you optimistic? 
R: I don’t know, sometimes I am not sure and sometimes I say I may get it. 
I: So in between? 
R: Yes.  
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?
R: Extremely. I want want my rights back to me from those infidels because we suffered a lot. 
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: In your opinion, who should be held accountable the most?
R: How? 
I: Who should be punished? Who committed crimes against you?
R: How?
I: You didn’t understand me! ISIS has committed crimes against you, do you want them to be punished? 
R: Yes. 
I: There are ranks in ISIS like Amir, Leaders, and normal young soldiers, should they all be punished with the same sentence or there should be a difference in their punishment? 
R: ISIS are all the same. 
I: There is no difference between anyone of them. We were in an Arab village. 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: How should they be held accountable and punished?
R: I want them to be punished severely. 
I: How do you want them to be punished? Execution or hanging? 
R: If they rip their bodies into parts would never be enough in comparison to what they have done to Yazidi people. They killed people, tortured people, took their kids, 
I: What did they do? 
R: Our women were holding their kids in their arms and they were hungry and asking for food. They were crying because they were hungry. A lot of women told me that they took a kid because he was crying; they cut his head off, boiled her little body and brought him to his mother as a meal. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Have you ever heard that there are people are sekking after your rights and Yazidi rights?
R: Yes.
I: Who?
R: I don’t know, but there are people who take our rights.
I: No, these people are trying to bring your rights back. You heard about them but you don’t who are they?
R: Yes. 
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is it possible to forgive them?
R: Who Yazidis?
I: No, ISIS.
R: No never it is impossible. 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: If you say that you can't forgive them, what are your demands to forgive them? Or you can never frgive them.
R: I never can forgive them. We all know what did they do to Yazidi people, we haven't done anything to them, and we were living peacefully. We never wanted war, we never obliged people to convert to our religion, but ISIS obliged us to convert to their religion. 
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? Do you want to know what's happening or you don’t care?
R:  Not really. A little bit
I: Why don’t you want to hear news about them?
R: I don’t want to hear a lot of news because we had seen enough, yet I check facebook to see updates. 
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what ISIS did to Yazidi people? 
R: Yes, it is very important that the world know about it.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: Do you want that your children know about what ISIS did to Yazidi people?
R: Yes, it is better for them to know about it. 
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why is it important for them to know? 
R: So that they can know what happened to their ancestors to protect themselves. So that they can be aware what ISIS did to Yazidi people.
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What should be done so that the next generations and people know about what ISIS have done? 
R: How?
I: Do you understand Arabic?
R: A bit
I: [Speaks Arabic] What should be done to make sure that people know about what ISIS have done?
R: It is all always good to publish what happened to Yazidi people on facebook and everywhere to let people know what happened. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: DO you know what Commission is? There is a commission in Iraq which is called Truth? Have you heard about it?
R: No. 
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: It is a investorgation commission which is run by the government, after they do their job, they write a report for the government about the death toll and what happened during conflict with ISIS. Is this enough to investigate ISIS crimes or you are asking for some bigger actions? 
R: There must be a lot of things, what we wanted is an International Protection for Yazidi because the crimes were brutal, and we need to live safely. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: Those who fell as victims of ISIS, what should be done for them?
R: How? 
I: You don’t what does that word mean? ISIS have killed a lot people, what should be done for those who have been victims of ISIS?
R: You can't do anything for those who have been killed, but at least other countries must announce it as genocide, provide an international protection, and prepare a safe haven for them. Yazidi people are harmless people, no one helps them, and we want that all people help them. 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: You said that Yazidi need International protection and what else?
R: We need the rest of the Yazidis to live in peace. 
I: And Genocide?
R: Yes.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Do you find yourself as a victim of ISIS?
R: How?
I: Do you see yourself as a victim of ISIS that ISIS committed crimes against you?
R: Extremely.
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why?
R: They committed brutal crimes against us, I stayed there for a year, it was all suffering. My son was a shepherd, I had his picture, they took a photo for both of us and sent it to my husband to offer him to buy us. 
I: How old was your son?
R: He was only five when he was captured. He was a shepherd for their livestock. He was wearing a pair of old shoes, but they took them and he was left barefeet. They obliged him to guard their livestock in the heat of the summer, when he was coming back, his feet were bleeding. He was hungry,and they didn’t feed him. They took me to Syria to work picking vegetables. 
I: Where in Syria? Raqaa?
R: No, a town callem Muslim, and a village near there. 
I: It is also Raqaa. Were you pregenant then? 
R: No, I gave birth to my baby boy in Iraq, and then they took to Syria. A lot of our relative ran away before ISIS coming to Shingal. They rescued themselves. 
I: Who left?
R: Only me and my mother-in-law. ISIS seized us; two of our aunts were with me. I gave birth to my child. My child was only two days. There were some of our relative with us, we wanted to run away, we packed our stuff and a gallon of water, we went through a village. 
I: Which village are you from? 
R: I am originally from Shingal, but we went to our relative's village. 
I: Wehre was it?
R: By the roads. 
I: What was called?
R: Shingal.
I: I know, but what was the name of the village? 
R: Neserin. 
I: How long did you say you stayed in captivity with ISIS?
R: One year. One year full. They came on August 3, we tried to run away a night before they came in. We packed our stuff; everyone ran away, my mother-in-law is an old woman. She couldn’t hold anyone, we ran away until we arrived a village, my mother-in-law could not continue. I was holding two of my children and two days old son. My children were very young and no one helped me. 
I: Then what happened, where did you go? 
R: We stayed in Nesiriye along with other ten elderly women who couldn’t run. The other day ISIS held us captive. 
I: Then where did they take you? 
R: They didn’t take us anywhere. They seized us. Five people entered the house and check it up. They said that there weren’t girls with us, they said if there were girl, they would have taken it. 
I: After that? They sold you?
R: An  member hit me with his gun, and told me that I was lying that the children weren’t mine. I was the only young woman with them, all of them were old. I told them that they are my kids, they said that my children are very young. I told them that I have twins. They said that they were searching for girls.
I: After that? What happened?
R:we stayed in the village for one month. Then they brought a Land Cruiser (a car). They put us in, we cried we thought that they would killd us, they took us to Kocho, we satyed there for two months, they brought people from all surrounding villages to Kocho, we lived in their houses. They killed men, then they took the young men and children to mosque, they asked them to convert to Islam, everybody went because they were so afraid, if they would refuse, they would have been shot in the head. 
I: Then where did they take you?
R: They took to Tal 'Affar
I: How long did you stay there?
R: I don’t really remember. We stayed there almost a month. 
I: How long did you stay in captivity?
R: One year.
I: How did you escape? Your husband helped you?
R: My husband was in Kurdistan.  My husband made it to Kurdistan. 
I: How much he paid to buy back?
R: My Husband ran away and could make it to Kurdistan.
I: I know that he could rescue himself. After that, how much he paid to buy you?
R: 33,000 USD. Abu Shijaa' saved us and brought us to my husband. After Tal 'Affar, they took to Musol. 
I: And after that to Syria, what did your husband do when you went back home? Was he happy?
R: He cried so much. He said he didn’t believe to see us again because he was not aware of us being alive or dead. 
I: After that program brought you here, you were separated from your husband right? 
R: Yes, and my husband was left in Iraq. 
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think that there will be a lasting peace in Iraq? 
R: We don’t see that Iraq will be a good place. 
I: Yeah, but what do you think?
R: I am not sure that it will be like before. I don’t know.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you what is Middle East? It is the Arab countries such as Egypt, Syria, Palestine, and Emirates. Do you think there will be peace in this area? Do you know what Peace is? Peace is when there is a war and the war is over so there is peace. So do you think that there will be a lasting peace?
R: I don’t know, in Arabic village?
I: Not villages, countries and cities like Egypt and Lebanon.
R: I don’t know. 
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: If you want to make Iraq a good place, what will you do? 
R: I hope that Iraq becomes a good place. 
I: If you make Iraq a good place, what will you do?
R: I kick the ISIS out of the country. I will make Iraq a better place. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Do you think that the current military campaigns (PPK, Peshmarga, YPG) against ISIS can kick ISIS out of Iraq? 
R: Yes. 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What should be done to protect Yazidi? How should we protect Yazidi?
R: Announcing Genocide and protect Yazidi people. 
I: OK, but how can we protect Yazidi people?
R: So that no one ever does anything to Yazidi people. 
I: How can we ptrotect Yazidi? 
R: If they announce it as Genocide, so Yazidi people can be protected. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
I: Do you still have fears from other wars other than ISIS one?
R: Yes. 
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?
R: Not really, not a lot. I cry a lot, but I don’t want to talk about it. I only talked about once. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: Why do you not want to talk about? 
R: When I talk about it, it hurts my feelings more. 
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Who did you talk to?
R: A psychological doctor. 
I: Nowadays, do you go to the psychologist every week?
R: I saw him three to four times. 
I: Now do you go?
R: No, it his holiday.
I: After holiday?
R: Yes. Every Wednesday.
I: Do you see your doctor alone or with other people?
R: We sit together. 
I: Have you talked to your family members about it?
R: No.
I: With anyone of the social workers?
R: We talked about them with them in Iraq not here. 
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
I: On facebook or anything else? 
R: No. 
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
I: A lwayer?
R: No.
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
I: Police? 
R: No, I have never talked to them about it. 
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Haveyou written about your experience om facebook or somewhere else?
R: Yes, in Iraq, we wrote about it at Dr. Mirza clinic. But not here. 
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came here, how often do you seek information or check news about ISIS? 
R: I don’t have time to check news a lot.
I: When you have time, how often do you check? Once a week or what?
R: I do, about thirty minutes each time. Three times a week. 
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you want to know?
R: We want to know what is happening, what are the military advances, and who was freed. 
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: Where do you seek information? From family members? 
R: from facebook.
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: Do you communicate with your Yazidi friends here?
R: Yes. 
I: Where do you get information? 
R: When we go together shopping, we exchange information. 
I: How do you contact each other? Via phones?
R: yes, we call each other. 
I: and Whatsapp?
R: Yes. 
I: Do you call your friends and family members?
R: Yes.
I: Do you use facebook to contact your friends and family members?
R: Yes. 
I: What about Radio and TV? Do you use them to get information?
R: I don’t listen to Radio. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: Has what happened to you affected your health?
R: Yes, it affected my movement. 
I: Where?
R: In Syria.
I: How did it affect your health? Has your experience with ISIS affected your body? Is the effect still in palce in your body?
R: We can never forget, it always hurts my head and thoughts. 
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: How bad is your health now? 
R: Now, is better than before. 
I: Then? 
R: It was terrible
I: Now?
R: It is good. 
I: How much?
R: 2. 
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: From one to four, how much pain do you feel?
R: What can I say?
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: DO you have Parasthesia of the skin? Do you usually scratch your skin? 
R: Not much. 
I: 1? 
R: Yes. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you feel that your movement is being limited that you can't move well? 
R: I have pains in my head and back. 
I: No, not that. We talk about your movement; from 0 to 4 how hard is it for you to move?
R: In between. 
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you feel that you faint and lose consciousness? 
R: I have severe pains in my head. 
I: A lot. 
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Are you ears, eyes, and nose OK? 
R: Yes, they are. 
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel that you have a shortness of breath? 
R: Sometimes. 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Does dizziness happen to you?
R: Yes, it happens to me. 
I: A lot?
R: Not really.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Do you have heart ache?
R: It hurts a lot. 
I: I don’t mean the pains you get from sadness; I mean the other real pain.
R: No, 
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Do you have stomachaches?
R: No.
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
I: Do you have any other pains?
R: My back hurts a lot and so does my head. 
Group	Group	
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
I: Do these pains appeard after your experiences with ISIS? 
R: Yes.
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
I: How much are you suffering from this pain? Does it hurt you everyday? 
R: Yes, it hurts me everyday. My legs hurt me too. 
I: What about your headache?
R: Always. 
I: How do you treat these pains?
R: I take pills.
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
 I: Why do you always have headache and backache?
R: It is because I think a lot. 
I: Why do you have a backache?
R: I don’t know.
I: It started aching when you were help captive right?
R: We were in captivity in a house of Saudi man in Syria, he was called Abo Saad, and there were a lot of people and children in one room. There was another woman with me with her five children and I was with my seven kids, we were all in one room upstairs. Their wives would come to us and beat children. They were enjoying and laughing while doing it. They were pulling my daughter's hair down to the garden and they were putting the knife on her kneck, they were telling her if she didn’t pray and supplicate for us, they would kill her. 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Do you think what happened to you was caused by your psychological state? Are you comfortable psychologically?
R: I am not comfortable. [ The children's noise is extremely disturbing and it confuses the speech] 
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think that your movement is limited or do you find difficulties to move? 
R: They hurt me at times. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: Do you think that what had happened was a negative force? 
R: A lot. 
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you say that what had happened to you was a punishment from God?
R: How?
I: Was what you have been through an act by God?
R: I don’t know. Sometimes I say that God has done this to us. But God does not say to go and kill Yazidi. 
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How has your experience with ISIS affected your relationship with your Yazidi people? Is it still the same? Or has it affected negatively? Do you have psychological problems that stop you from building relationships?
R: I swear in Iraq.
I: No, Here? After you came here, can you make friends? Is your relationship with people OK? 
R: It is OK, but I think a lot.
I: How is your relationship with your children? 
R: I get angry very easily. 
I: What about your husband?
R: I am OK, but I get angry. 
I: How is your husband with you?
R: He was very good with me then, but now he is not as caring as before. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: Has what had happened to you affected your daily life? 
R: It affected our life very much, but still we are better here now. Every one who was freed from ISIS understands each other. If we cry until the end of our lives would not be enough for what we have been through. We witnessed what they did to girls in Kocho. They gathered girls from every town and they were taking them. They were pulling their hair and were beating them. They were threatening them with knives and guns. The girls were crying and were hitting on the car windows. In Kocho, they took two young girls from their father's hands. 
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: After your experiences with ISIS, do you feel that you are excluded?
R: I still feel included. 
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: After your experiences with ISIS, was your faith affected? Is it stronger now or weaker?
R: My relationship with my religion is fine. Whatever happens I am Yazidi until I die. 
I: Is your faith stronger or is it as before?
R: It is as before. I went to SHaikh Hadi spiritual place; I was baptized with his water. Then, I visited Zahraty place to become Halal again. 
I: What else did you do to feel better?  Have you go to Lalish?
R: yes. 
I: What did they do to you to make you happy and contented?
R: They didn’t do anything to me, but when I went to Zahrati.. 
I: What is Zahrati?
R: I went there I poured water on me. 
I: Was it only you or your kids too?
R: My children too. I took all of them. 
I: How did they feel afterwards?
R: They are very happy now.
I: When you took you rkids there and washed them up with the water, did they understand that it was a religious ritual?
R: Yes, they were very happy for it. They were by their father and their people. 
I: Did your husband do too?
R: Yes, he did. 
I: How did he feel? Did he feel something?
R: Yes, very much. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I: 
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: Here in Germany, what do you do to make yourself relieved? 
R: How?
I: to make your sadness go away?
R: It never goes away. 
I: But what do you do?
R: I can't do anything, if my husband were here; it would help us a bit. I don’t have anyone here, only my kids are here. When I am get angry, sad, or bored, I can't even prepare food for my kids. I don’t have anyone here. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Does you belief in your Yazidi community and Yazidi people help you feel better?
R: Yes, it does. 
I: How much?
R: Here. 
I: Yes. 
R: I don’t have anyone here, I have never visited anyone. 
I: Anyone you visited, or even in Iraq?
R: In Iraq it was good, but here is nothing. 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe that you are a strong person? 
R: In my beliefs, I am a strong person. 
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: Do you pray to your God?
R: Yes a lot. 
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: DO you want to stay alone?
R: How?
I: That you want to spend your time alone?
R: May be an hour, but not always. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Do you avoid yourself from people? Or do you stay with people? When you try to avoid people, does it help you? 
R: It doesn’t make any difference?
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you talk to people about your experience with ISIS? Or you don’t want that?
R: If I have friends, it would have been better. 
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: DO you want to talk to apsychologist? Or it doesn’t matter?
R: It doesn’t help at all. 
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: DO you seek psychological help from Yazidi community?
R: It only helps when it comes to my kids.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: What do you do to forget about your sorrows? There are women who do painting and drawing to forget, what do you to forget?
R: I only do anything, only my kids make me forget about them. Here at school I can't even look at my notes. I don’t have time. 
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you ever taken any medications to help you sleep or feel better? 
R: No. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: Have you ever gone to a psychologist? 
R: I have never been with them alone. 
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: When you went to Lalish and got  washed up by the water, did it help you feel better?
R: Yes very much. 
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Do you like to take herbs and herbal teas such as Green tea or any other herbal liquids, do you feel that they help?
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Do you have a supervisor or social worker here who talks to you and help you feel better?
R: There is Suzane. 
I: Does she help you or not?
R: Yes, she does for example for doctor's appointment. 
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Doctors? If there were doctors, would it help you?
R: Yes, they would help. 
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did it help? A lot, moderately, so so, bad? 
R: They are good. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did a psychologist help?
R: I didn’t go to psychologist. 
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: When you were with group psychotherapy, did it help?
R: How?
I: When you were with other women and you were talking to them and listening to them, did it help?
R: A little bit. 
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did natural herbs and tea help you?
R: Normal. 
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: Seeing a doctor, taking natural herbs, sitting in a group therapy, or speaking a social worker, did all these things make feel you better? 
R: They are good, but you know there is something about me that I can't say it in a group session. 
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: What kind of help are you looking for? 
R: How? 
I: I mean do you need any =one else to help you other than doctors, social workers, or group therapy?
R: No. 
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: Anything that reminded you about ISIS? We are talking about the past week until now? 
R: I always think about them because we have been through a lot. My kids were crying for food, but they didn’t give them food. We gave them our bodies just to give us food for my kids. 
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have problems staying asleep?
R: Yes, I always see dreams. 
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Are there particular things that make you keep thinking about them?
R: A lot of time ….. [The interpreter intrupts the respondent, and she does not translate almost half of her answers in this part] 
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Have you ever felt that you are an angry person?
R: A lot of times I get angry. 
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Do you try to avoid thinking about what happened to you? Or you always think abou it?
R: I aways think about it. 
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: You think about those things, but you don’t mean to?
R: I can't stop thinking about them. 
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Have you ever felt that what happened to you was a dream? Or you know that it was real?
R: I always think about it. 
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you try to make yourself not to think about it, or you can't do that?
R: I can’t. 
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: DO their pictures pop in your mind? 
R: Yes, always. 
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Are you easily startled?
R: Yes. 
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: DO you try not to think about it? 
R: I try to focus on my kids not to think about it, but I can't.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: Do you have feel ings that a lot of things happened to you, but you don’t know how to deal with them? 
R: I always think about it. 
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Do you feel numb when you think abou them? 
R: yes.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Do you feel that you are back at that time when you think about? 
R: Yes, when I think about them, I see dreams and I feel that I am back at that time. 
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: You said you had troubles during sleep, right?
R: Yes, I sleep, but I see a lot of nightmares. 
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Do you ever feel a strong wave of feelings hitting you?
R: How?
I: Sometimes, when ahuman beings think about stuff, they get strongs feelings? Do you get that?
R: yes. 
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you try to remove it from your memory? Do you say to yourself that you have to remove it away from mind?
R: Yes, I try not to think about it. 
I: You try, but it didn’t work?
R: Yeah.
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you have problems with concentrating? Do you understand? When you say something but you can't focus?
R: How?
I: Like when some people talk to you, butyour mind is not with them?
R: Yes, sometimes when my teacher explains the lecture, I can't focus at all. 
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: Do you get physical reactions when you think about them? 
R: Yes, my body feels heavy. 
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel that you are watchfull or on guard?
R: Yes, I often wake up at night and look around. 
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Do you try not to talk about your experience?
R: I don’t want to talk about it, but I always think about it. 
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: What are the most positive things that you experienced in Germany in the past two years?
R: Germany is such a good place, it is safe for people to live, kids go to school, and it is like a new life. 
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: How satisfied are you with the Project that brought you here? 
R: What?
I: You don’t know about the program which brought you here?
R: I don’t know anything!
I: [Speaks Arabic] The program that brought you here, it is a program that brings Yazidi people here?
R: Dr. Mirza!?
I: This program that brought you from Iraq to Germany, how satisfied are you with the program?
R: I am very thankful to the Germany and the program that helped us to be here. 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Why did you like the program?
R: Because it helped Yazidi people. It brought a lot of people here; there were people that were in terrible situation. I hope that they bring all other people here.
I: If the same program prepares everything for you, takes you to the doctors, gathers your family by you, and gives you a house, but in Iraq, would you accept to go back?
R: No, I don’t want to return to Iraq. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Does the program that helped Yazidi women and brought you here need any improvements?
R: It doesn’t need any more thing because they have done a lot to us. We are very thankful. There is no more room for any other one. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: What gives you hope for the future? Where do you get your hope? 
R: How?
I: Now I have hopes for my future because my family lives here and I work here. So where do you get you hopes for the future?
R: I don’t have anyone, my kids are my only hope here, and they will grow and get a job. I hope that my husband will join me. 
I: Thank you very much.