Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
Audio file name: [029]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself. C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim. C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you? C02 Tu çend salî yî? C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R: By God, I am 23.
C04 What is your marital status? C04 Tu zewiciyi yan na? C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married or single?
R: No, I am not married.
I: So, you are a single maiden?
R: Yes, I am.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner? C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?” C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any? C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn? C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: How many people live with you? How many people are you at home?
R: By God, I am by myself.
I: You live alone?
R: Yes, I do.
C07 Who are they? C07 Ew kî ne? C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)? C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language? C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn? C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Can you read simple texts?
R: Yes, I am good at reading, I know how to read.
C10 What is your highest education level? C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Until which level have you studied?
R: Here, or in Iraq?
I: In Iraq.
R: I could not continue going to school after the 4th grade.
C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school? C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)? C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Are you going to school now?
R: Sorry?
I: Are you currently going to school?
R: In here?
I: Yes.
R: Here I have been going to school for the last 3 months.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future? C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî, tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê? C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed? C14 Tu nahe kar diki? C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you working here? Do you have a job?
R: By God, there’s no work, there’s only school.
C15 If yes, what is your current work? C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî? C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment? C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki? C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Are you seeking employment? Or are you planning that for after graduation?
R: Yes, I’d seek employment after I finish my studies.
C18 If not, why not? C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki? C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home? C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir? C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before ISIS attacked you in Iraq, did you have a job?
R: No, my mother was sick and I was giving her care at home.
C20 If yes, what was your work? C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir? C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any? C22 dine te chiya? C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R: Yazidi
C23 Please specify your religion C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group? C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî? C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: From which nation are you? What is your nationality? Are you Kurdish, Arabic, Turkmen, or Yazidi?
R: Yazidi
C25 Please specify your ethnic group C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye? C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS Pêşik û Şertên niha Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: Now we will ask you about your life expectations and problems. Is it OK? Thank you.
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today? D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye? D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What are your immediate concerns and most important priority?
R: By God, you all have seen that ISIS entered into Sinjar, it’s been 3 years since. Half of the Yazidis are murdered, and the other half is in prison.
I: So, what is your priority in life today, right now?
R: For me… I’ve been by myself, I’ve felt alone for the last 3 years, no one could get free from my family, All I want from God is to re-unite with my family.
I: Is your whole family captured by ISIS?
R: My whole family is in the hands of ISIS.
I: All of them?
R: I don’t know whether they are dead or alive. I know that 2 of my brothers are free, and one of my sisters is free, but the rest of my family is in the hands of ISIS.
I: 2 brothers and 1 sister is free?
R: Yes.
I: What about the others? How many people are in your family?
R: We were eight.
I: Are your parent captured, too?
R: Yes.
I: Did you run away with your siblings, or you managed to get out before them?
R: We all were in the hands of ISIS and I was with my brothers, 2 of them, when we got free.
I: You and your brothers, but not with your sister?
R: No, my sister was married, she’s alo free now, but not with us.
I: So, 4 of you were saved.
R: Yes.
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life? D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe? D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need the most to rebuild your life?
R: By God, it’s my family that I need the most. I want nothing but to reunite with my family. I am exhausted, spiritually, mentally, In all aspects.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now? D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye? D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: How much control and power do you have over your life? Can you decide on your own? Do you fell like you have control over your life?
R: By God, No.
I: How would you grade it between 0 and 4?
R: I’d definitely call it zero for me.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you? D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye? D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think about your future? What is in that future?
R: I feel like I cannot have a positive thought about any future as long as my family is in the hands of ISIS. I cannot think about my life, but only think about theirs. My only wish is to reunite with them in here. Since the last 3 years, they have been killing us. All of my uncles are murdered. We want you to spread our voice. Do not let our voice die out. Save my family from them. My broad family is already dead, in some houses, 10 people lived and no one survived.
I: Would you like to go outside for some fresh air?
R: No, it’s OK.
I: We can go out for some time, if you want to
R: No.
I: If you don’t want to answer a question, just tell us, OK?
R: No, I’m OK. But we want our voice to get spread. We endured such cruelties and hardship. No food, no water to drink… I want nothing that my family is rescued.
I: Yes, we are here to hear your voice. We know Yazidis have suffered a lot. People always say that the sufferings of Yazidis are endured by none other people.
R: We went through a lot.
I: We want to be of help, we want to spread your voice, too
R: Whatever you can, please let our voice be heard.
I: Where are your 2 brothers and sister?
R: They’re in Iraq.
I: In Iraq or Kurdistan?
R: In Kurdistan.
I: Where in Kurdistan, Duhok?
R: In Zaho.
I: Do you know anything about your parents’ situation?
R: Nothing, our last contact was 3 years ago.
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live? D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî? D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: Now, a hypothetical question: Let’s assume that the war is over and the situation in Iraq improves. Would you prefer to live in Germany or go to Iraq or Kurdistan?
R: By God, there’s no place better for people than their own land. I am here today, but it’s not my choice. But after all that I’ve been through in Iraq, I’d never wish to return there.
I: So, do you want to stay in Germany?
R: By God, yes, I want to stay.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location? D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir? D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
I: You said you’d like to stay, and that it’s because of the violence you were faced with in the hands of ISIS. Are there any other reasons why you want to stay?
R: By God, in all eras Yazidi people have always faced a decree. But this is unmatched. I am so happy and thank everyone who helped provide shelter for us. By God, I never wish to go step foot on Iraq, ever.
I: You don’t want to go back to Iraq?
R: No, I don’t. I want to reunite with two of my brothers here, I wish they come beside me, but I don’t want to go to Iraq.
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany? D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe? D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel like Germany is your place? That you are a part of this city?
R: What I can say is that I have no other place left for me, other than here.
I: I see, but do you see Germany as home? Scaling from 0 to 4?
R: I’d say half, 2. 1 or 2. After what I’ve experienced, I don’t have a place in Iraq. But I am not comfortable in here, none of us are. We don’t have our nice homes.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years? D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû? D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: How was your experience in the first two years of your time in Germany? Were people nice to you?
R: We were welcome here, but we are not in comfort here.
I: Why aren’t you comfortable?
R: We live together in small rooms, without enough personal space. We are thankful that we are brought here, but we are not feeling at ease. 
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way? D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin? D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: So, how has your experience been in Germany? On a scale from 0 to 4?
R: Half positive and half negative. 2.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe? D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye? D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If you were to return to Iraq or Kurdistan, what needs change over there for you to go?
R: I never think about going back to Iraq. I never feel that I’d call that place home again.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic. E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you? E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be? E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: Do you know the concept of justice? You demand justice if someone violates your right.
R: Yes, I do.
I: You understand what justice is?
R: Yes, I understand
I: What does justice mean to you?
R: My family is gone. I only wish the best about my family. This is all I can think of.
I: So, what does justice mean to you? How would you demand justice?
R: There’s nothing I demand for myself, but for all Yazidis. Half of the Yazidis are displaced, and the other half are murdered. We are left with no home. In the last 3 years all Yazidis have been living in tents, none of us can properly feed ourselves. We want all Yazidis to find peace and comfort. 
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS? E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e? E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that you have justice, and your rights secured again? Is it important or not very important?
R: It is profoundly important.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice? E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in? E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: How hopeful are you that justice will happen? Do you have hope that your rights will be secured?
R: By God, all I can say is that I’ve experienced nothing that would give me hope.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions? E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete? E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it for you that ISIS, who perpetrated violence against you, civilians are punished?
R: It has great significance. It is important for us that they are punished for their crimes. They have tyrannized over us.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way? E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da? E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Do you think there are other reasons for their punishment?
R: For them Yazidis are not human beings, Yazidis are infidels. They made us suffer. They should get what they deserve. 
E06 Who should be held accountable? E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye? E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: ISIS has commanders, soldiers, their wives and children, who do you think should be punished? Only the commanders, or all of them?
R: All of them should be punished. When I was their captive, their wives and children made me suffer. Now we are only talking about it. Also in Iraq I’ve talked to many American, German, or French people, but no one did anything for 3 years.
E07 And how should they be held accountable? E07 çawa? E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: How do you think ISIS should be punished for their cruelty against you?
R: I wish that they suffer much more than we have been suffering.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike? E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Have you ever heard of any persons, organizations or groups who try to support your rights, carry your voice?
R: No, I haven’t heard of it. Children, women, elderly Yazidis knocked all doors and talked to all governments, but nothing has been done. 
E09 If yes, which ones? E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in? E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence? E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin? E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Can you forgive ISIS?
R: No.
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive? E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki? E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: What should be done for you, or for ISIS, so that you can forgive?
R: Can ISIS resurrect the dead? No, they can not. And if not, then I can’t forgive.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic. E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important for you to know what ISIS is doing in Iraq? Would you like to learn, or you wouldn’t like to hear?
R: I don’t want to hear even a bit. For 2 years we have been suffering. I don’t want to know more about them, I know them well enough.
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it that all nations, all the world, and the future generations to know about what ISIS have done?
R: It is very important.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened? E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu? E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why is it important for you that all the world and your children know about what ISIS did to you?
R: I wish that we get to know who our enemies are. We were living in our home, without knowing who is the enemy that surrounds us. This is the reason why all this happened to us.
I: You mean Arabs around you? 
R: Yes, Arabs.
I: Which village are you from?
R: Kocha.
I: Any other reasons?
R: We couldn’t know who the enemy was, future generations should know. That’s all
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened? E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu? E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission? E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)? E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Do you know what commission means?
R: Yes
I: Have you ever heard of a truth commission?
R: Sorry?
I: There’s a commission, it’s called truth commission. Have you ever heard about it?
R: Yes, I think I have.
I: What do you know about that commission? You can explain in Arabic or Kurdish. What are your ideas about the commission?
R: (Speaking Arabic)
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes? E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre? E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: Government creates this commission, to investigate about ISIS. This commission investigates, writes a report and submits it to the government. Do you think such a commission would be good?
R: I believe it’s not enough
I: You want more?
R: Yes. While in Iraq, we have walked to the doors of all governments, all commissions, thousands of times. They don’t care. None of them does anything, none of them stands up. None of them care about what happened to us.
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS? E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish? E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What do you think should be done for the victims of ISIS’ cruelty, both survivors and the dead? 
R: Done to ISIS?
I: No, for the victims, for survivors like you, and the victims who died. What should be done?
R: (Speaks Arabic) The thing to be done should be something big.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis? E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe? E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: What should people do for Yazidis? Should Yazidis be protected, or carried?
R: I wish nothing but our poor people are rescued. We have no contact with ISIS captives. They killed so many women, so many children.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim? E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen? E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: When you look at yourself, do you feel as a victim of ISIS? Do you see yourself as a victim of ISIS? (Speaks Arabic)
R: I don’t understand what victim means.
I: Ah you don’t understand the word. Do you know what “injured party” means?
R: Yes
I: Do you see yourself as an injured party?
R: Yes, I do.
E23 Why do you feel that way? E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin? E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE Aşitî Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions. F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim. F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq? F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)? F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think there will be peace in Iraq?
R: No, I don’t believe that.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries? F02 Û li fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her welêtiki?” F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you know what Middle East means? Middle East is Arabic countries, Egypt, Sudan, Syria, Iraq…
R: Yes, I know.
I: Do you believe there will be peace in the region, across those countries?
R: No, I don’t believe that, either.
I: Why?
R: Because ISIS is made up of the citizens of those countries, Muslims. Of course not all of them, but from corrupt Muslim Arabs. As long as they exist, there’ll be war.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? F03 Ji bo aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe? F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What should happen to build peace in Iraq?
R: I don’t know. I am 23, and the world I’ve heard from my parents has always been like this. As long as those corrupt Muslims are in Iraq, Iraq’s stability cannot improve.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS? F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe? F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Do you know about the military campaign against ISIS? Is it good?
R: Yes, it’s good. No good for Yazidis, but it’s good for Iraq. It’s good for the Iraqi government, but not for us, Yazidis. 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq? F05 Û ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe? F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What should be done to protect Yazidis?
R: If only the decrees were stopped, we were given a place…
I: A bigger place?
R: A big and nice place.
I: Do you mean a big place in Sinjar, or in another place?
R: Yazidis were not only in Sinjar. I am talking about all Yazidis in Iraq.
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through. G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS? G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)? G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, how many times could you talk to anyone about your experiences related to ISIS?
R: I haven’t told anyone here.
I: Here, you mean in Germany, you didn’t talk to anyone?
R: No.
I: In Iraq?
R: I told.
I: When?
R: Before I came to Germany 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you? G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)? G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you? G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin) G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: Why didn’t you talk about it in here?
R: After talking about it a lot in Iraq, I saw that it was no good. Here people still call us to talk about it but nothing good comes out.
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to. G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin) G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Who did you talk to? A lawyer, or court?
R: I’ve talked to both lawyers and the court. Many people came, called us, and we told them everything.
G05 If other, please specify G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
I: Have you ever talked to your friends or acquaintances?
R: No, other people were talking, but I only talked in court, or to the police.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper? G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû, (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu? G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
I: Have you ever talked on a TV?
R: No.
IF LAWYER Heger parêzer be Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer? G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû? G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them? G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we yan hûn chun jem ? G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer? G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ? G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them? G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt? G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE [Heger shirteye) Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them? G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ? G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police? G12 hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete te bi shertede deyi ? G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
I: Do you know what those statements are for? What will they be used for?
R: I just told everything I know to the police.
I: Did you know why they were taking your statements?
R: We were saved from the hands of ISIS, they asked us what happened, and we told them. They were saying that they will use the information to do something about it.
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them? G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt? G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Could you learn about the results of your communication with the police?
R: They said they will take care of it, they will investigate.
I: After that day, did the police make any explanation to you?
R: No.
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book? G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî? G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Have you ever written about your experiences? In a notebook, or on Facebook, etc?
R: No, I haven’t.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you? G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin? G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written. G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)? G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS? G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin? G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany, how many times have you checked the news about what is happening in Iraq? Everyday, once a month, once a week?
R: We all know what is happening in Iraq every day.
I: So, you want to know, you check the news?
R: I speak with people in Iraq. We know what is happening there.
I: Do you talk to them on the phone?
R: Yes
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)? G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)? G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
G20 Where do you seek information? G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin? G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
G21 If other, please specify G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one? G22 hûn û malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: Do you use Facebook?
R: No, I don’t have Facebook, I use WhatsApp.
I: Do you chat with your family and friends over WhatsApp?
R: Yes, we do. We ask about how they are and what’s going on. We ask if there are any rescued people. We ask about what ISIS did more.
G23 If other, please specify G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA TRAÛMA TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question. H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri) H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS? VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin? VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity? VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man? VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: For how long have you been kept as a captive by ISIS?
R: For 1 year.
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape? VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin? VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: How were you captured?
R: We were in our village, Kocho. When they came, we were in no position to escape. 4 or 5 vehicles of ISIS entered into the village. They said that we can stay in our village, that we are brothers and sisters, that they no problem with us. So we stayed in our homes. They told us to become Muslims. And we told them that we don’t want to become Muslims. The elderly of our village asked for several days permission to think about it. And we tried to find a way to save ourselves in those days, but we could not.
I: And then, what did you do?
R: There was another village like us, we couldn’t escape. And then, on August 15th they came and told us that we should gather at the school.
I: You all were gathered at a school?
R: Yes
I: Where was the school?
R: Close to the village
I: In Kocho?
R: Yes
I: What happened after they took you to the school?
R: Men were outside, women and children were inside the school. Then they took away the men and killed them. They got us out of there. Then we went to Sinjar. Then they separated our mothers from us, and they killed our mothers. They took the children and took them to their own camps. They took the girls to Mosul. Their elders came and took away any girl they wanted. They were selling girls to each other. Sometimes they were selling the same girl to 10 different people. Me and my two sisters were in Mosul. They came to us, they beat us and forced each of us to go with them. There were thousands of girls with us. Sometimes they were selling us to their brothers, or friends. Girls aged 8,9, or 10 had to sleep with dozens of men. I’ve seen with my own eyes that they took a 9-year-old girl by force. Dozens of men slept with a 9-year-old girl by force. Nobody knows what we happened to us. They forced us to sleep with them, every single time. I wished my own death from God, a hundred times a day. 10 men came by my side every day, they did not look like human beings, they looked like creatures. Many people killed themselves there. We couldn’t eat, we couldn’t drink water. They used to tie our hands when they lie down beside us. There was nothing left, nothing more they didn’t do to us. They forced us to pray, and I prayed to God to take my life.
I: Where did you go after you left Mosul? Did you go to Syria?
R: I did not go to Syria. The person who bought me was taking me wherever he went, but we were always in Iraq.
I: Has anyone bought you?
R: We were all in one place, somebody came and told me that he'll buy me. I said so many times, I said “kill me, but don’t take me with you.” I was with him for a year, but he never sold me.
I: Were you always with him?
R: Yes, I was always with him. But my friends were with me and some of them were sold to ten different people. Sometimes, someone was buying a friend, and then he gave her to his father or brother when he was done.
I: How did you escape from ISIS?
R: I’ve been to all over Iraq with that man. I was in different town every day. I tried to escape three times, but every time he caught me. He did not kill me, but he made me suffer worse. Finally, in Mosul, I managed to escape and break free.
I: Did you escape and leave Mosul?
R: Yes.
I: How did you manage to escape?
R: I always had 20-30 men around me, so I could not escape for a long time.
I: Yes, then what did you do?
R: Then they brought me and put me in a house. He told me that one of his friends died in war, and he must leave me alone for half an hour. And he told me not to escape. He brought the Quran and forced me to vow on the book that I’ll not escape. So, I did as he said.
I: You vowed on Quran?
R: I had to.
I: I know, I know. Don’t worry, you are not responsible from what you did there. And then?
R: So, I assured him that I am not going to escape, and he left the house. After he left I got dressed in all black and left the house.
I: Anything else you’d like to add?
R: I’m done, I’ve told what happened.
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being? H01 chiqes pisbune daishe ( ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend? H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: Did your experience with ISIS affect your health?
R: Yes.
I: How bad is your health? Is it a lot, average, or some?
R: Now?
I: How bad is your health right now because of the cruelty by ISIS you have experienced?
R: It is very badly influenced, but I was much worse when I was there, now it's not as bad as it was.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being? H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê chu saxbuna we bedilend? H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: I understand, can I say that now your health is half as good, or is it good?
R: I'm very good here.
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced? H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine? H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Do you have a sickness?
R: They hit me so many times and so hard that I still have headaches.
H04 Pain H04 Êş (eshek) H04 Schmerz
I: Now, I’ll ask you questions and you’ll answer on a scale from 0 to 4.
R: OK.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause) H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you have pain on your body? Between 0 and 4.
R: My pain is rather spiritual.
I: Yes, but do you feel pain on your body? You said you have headaches.
R: Yes, I have headaches. It got worse during my escape because I ran for too long.
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties) H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi) H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you have trouble walking or moving?
R: No, it’s just the headache and a lot of pain in my eye.
I: Is it only pain, or do you have trouble seeing?
R: Sometimes I cannot see properly because of my headache.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling) H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be herzin/dejerfen H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you ever feel like losing your mind, do you have losses of consciousness? Do you ever fall down and faint?
R: In Iraq, I fainted, lost my consciousness 3 times, but it didn’t happen again since I’m here. Just the headache.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder) H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you experience shortness of breath?
R: Yes, I often feel grief and I have difficulty breathing.
I: Is it too often?
R: Sometimes it happens, and they call an ambulance 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance) H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte wekî dinya li dora we digere H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you ever feel dizzy, losing your balance?
R: Yes, sometimes.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats) H11 dle ta deshe H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Do you have heart pains?
R: No, but I feel discomfort in my heart when I feel short of breath.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea) H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Do you have pain your stomach or abdomen?
R: No.
H13 Do you have any other symptoms? H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)? H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group Group 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned? H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn? H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine? H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any? H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye? H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health? H18 Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin? H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: What do you think is the reason for your headache? You said it got worse when you were running for your escape.
R: I remember having a sharp pain while I was running.
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health: H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir? H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: Now I’ll give you some concepts and you’ll tell me how important they are on your wellbeing.
R: OK.
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence) H20 Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel) H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Between 0 and 4, how comfortable are you psychologically?
R: My psyche is not comfortable, at all.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction) H21 lashe ta, misal (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you feel physical discomfort?
R: When I think about my time over there, I feel depressed and I cry.
I: So, it’s only your head, and nothing else?
R: Nothing else.
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms) H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi) H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins) H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you ever think that this is because of religion and faith?
R: No.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people? H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye navbera we u milete kiri? H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: What ISIS did to you; did it effect your relations with other people? Do you communicate with people like you used to do?
R: No, nothing like th old times.
I: You used to have friends and family in Iraq, and you had good communication, is it the same now?
R: No, it’s not.
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community? H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye? H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: You are a Yazidi; how did what ISIS did affect your situation as a Yazidi?
R: I don’t know. I don’t know what to say.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion? H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî? H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith? H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we? H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Did ISIS affect your faith, your religious belief? Do you have a stronger or weaker faith after what they did?
R: I will follow my own religion until the day I die. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith? H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari) we ji bo diyanet yizidi? H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I: So, all that happened made your faith stronger?
R: They tried to force me into becoming Muslim.
I: Yes, but inside, you were still a Yazidi.
R: Of course, I was, and I am still a believer of my own religion.
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence? H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî? H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: What do you do today, tohelp you forget about what you experienced. For example, some women paint, some do sewing to help forget.
R: Yes, they advise us to do such things, but I don’t.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief? H30 çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)? H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: Anything to help forget?
R: I am trying to forget, but I can’t.
I: Do you take medication for your headache?
R: No.
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence? H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê : H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now, I’ll give you some options, and you’ll say which one makes you feel better, OK?
R: OK.
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family) H32 te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet) H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: The Yazidi women who are with you, do they help you forget?
R: We are all like each other. What I told you, they have also experienced the same.
I: So, you are not different from each other?
R: No, they endured the same experiences.
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength) H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî) H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: I see. Being together helps you, or you’d prefer to be alone?
R: We all have experiences the same, so it’s good that we talk about it with each other.
I: Do you think you are self sufficient? Are you strong enough to take care of yourself?
R: No, I have no strength left in me.
I: I mean, do you believe can you stand on your own feet?
R: Yes, I can, but I cannot make myself better.
I: I see. I think you are so strong, after all the violence you were subjected to. You are still standing after everything.
R: Yes, we are resilient in spite of all we went through.
I: And you?
R: Both me, and my friends, we are resilient to endure all that happened to us.
H34 Praying H34 limê kirin H34 Beten
I: Do you pray?
R: Night and day I pray.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone) H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Do you want to spend time alone, or be with others? Do you think spending time alone would do you good?
R: No, being alone is hard. I don’t even want to eat when I’m alone.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS) H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we) H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Can you achieve avoiding thinking about your experiences?
R: I don’t want to think about my experiences.
I: Do you feel comfortable when you can avoid your thoughts?
R: Of course, yes.
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: You said before that you don’t want to talk about your experiences. Do you feel relieved if you talk about what you experienced to others?
R: Yes.
I: You’d feel relieved, but you don’t want to talk about them?
R: Yes
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists) H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst) H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Would you like to see a psychologist?
R: They tell us to visit, but my discomfort increases every time talk about what happened.
I: I understand, have you been to a psychologist before?
R: I’ve been there once, but I got uncomfortable speaking about my experiences.
I: Would you like to see a psychologist again?
R: No, I don’t.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39 alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Have you ever sought help from the Yazidi communities in here? Do you think you can receive help from them?
R: No, everybody is in similar situations. Nobody is in a better situation to help others.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope? H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe. H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you have any other ways to forget?
R: No, I don’t think there is.
Group Group 
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being. H45 Niha ezê navê reya bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: Now, I’ll ask some more questions and you’ll tell us if you have done that or not, OK?
R: OK
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood) H46 îlaç (derman) H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you taken sleeping pills or a medicine to help you forget?
R: No.
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi) H47 Psychologen
I: Were you a group in the psychotherapist, or were you alone?
R: I was alone.
H48 Individual psychotherapy H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
I: So, you were not in a group there
R: No.
H50 Religious or traditional healer H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari) H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Have you ever visited Baba Sheiykh?
R: Yes, I have
I: In Iraq?
R: Yes
I: Did it make you feel good?
R: Yes, doing what’s necessary according to our religion makes me feel relieved.
H51 Herbal medicine H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati) H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Do you use herbal medicine? Like herbal teas?
R: No.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare) H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan) H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: There’s a woman, a social worker with you who helps, right?
R: Yes
I: Is she good, does she help?
R: Yes, what can I say, she’s good. She doesn’t help with much, but she’s good.
H53 Doctor or physician H53 toxter? H53 Ärzte
I: Have you ever been to a physician?
R: Yes, when I feel sick.
I: So, you go.
R: Yes
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help? H54 Toxter: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Do doctors help, or are they no good?
R: I see their help in many things.
H55 If medication: how much did it help? H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help? H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help? H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help? H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help? H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help? H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help? H61 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: The woman, social worker who helps you. How can she help you better?
R: Not only for me, but for all of us.
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike? H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet? H64 Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye? H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: What kind of a professional aid you would like? You have a female social worker, and you’ve been to a psychologist but it didn’t help. What else would you like to have?
R: It would be good if we have our homes, each of us in our own homes.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Now I’ll read you a list and you’ll tell me how often you have then in the last week.
R: OK.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: How often do you remember your bad feelings and experiences? Between 0 and 4.
R: By God, it’s 4.
I: Do you have any other thoughts?
R: Just what I’ve told you about.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu) H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
H69 I felt irritable and angry H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Have you felt angry in the last week?
R: 4. 
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist. H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Can you avoid getting upset?
R: By God, no.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Do you usually remember at times that you don’t want to?
R: Yes
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Do you ever feel that all that happened was not real, a bad dream?
R: Yes, many times I get that feeling.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist. H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you try to forget, stay away from what ISIS did?
R: Yes, I try hard, but I can’t forget.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind H74 suret e ten sari ta H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do you have pictures in your mind?
R: Yes
I: How often
R: Whenever I have thoughts
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Are you jumpy and afraid?
R: Mostly
I: 3 or 4?
R: Not 4, but yes, 3.
H76 I tried not to think about it H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim. H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try not to think about it?
R: Yes, I try hard, I constantly try.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie. H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: Do you want to not deal with your feelings about it?
R: I don’t want to think
I: Do you try hard?
r: Yes, but I can’t.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder) H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Sometimes, when a person thinks about something, they feel numb or shivering. Does this happen to you?
R: Yes. Especially before going to sleep, I see bad dreams and I wake up shivering in fear.
I: Do you ever feel numb when you think about what happened? Do you ever feel numb?
R: No.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir. H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: When you remember, do you feel like you were back at that time?
R: Yes.
I: Often?
R: Yes, often.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir. H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble falling asleep?
R: Sometimes I cannot sleep because of my thoughts.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I. Sometimes we feel emotions like a hammer blow. Do you ever feel do?
R: Yes.
I: How often? 3, 2, 1, 0?
R: I can say 3.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim. H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Have you ever tried to remove it from you memory?
R: Yes, I have.
I: How often?
R: Very often.
H83 I had trouble concentrating H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir. H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you have trouble concentrating? Do you know what concentration means?
R: No.
I: You know, sometimes people say ‘hey, where’s your mind?’
R: Yes, that happens a lot. People speak beside me, but my mind is always elsewhere and I don’t hear them.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: Do you sweat when you think about what happened, do you feel breathless or nauseated?
R: Yes, I feel breathless. After I cry, I can breathe normally again.
I: Does it happen often?
R: Not always, sometimes.
H85 I had dreams about it H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît. H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you ever see dreams about this?
R: Yes
I: How often?
R: All the dreams that I see are about my family or about ISIS.
I: Would you say 2, 3, or 4?
R: I can say that all my dreams are bad dreams.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir. H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel uneasy, watchful?
R: I am not at ease, at all.
H87 I tried not to talk about it H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim. H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Have you tried not talking about it? Do you want to not talk about your experiences?
R: I really don’t want to talk about my experiences.
H88 Thank you for these responses. H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany? H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne? H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: What was the most positive experience you since you came to Germany?
R: What’s positive is that we have a place in here better than Iraq. We were living in tent camps, with little food. Here we are fine, our expenses are covered and we are eating well.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time? H90 tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu? H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: How glad are you with this project which brought you to Germany from Iraq?
R: By God, I am so glad with them.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion? H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota? H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Can you tell 3 reasons why this project is good?
R: As I said, we had no place there. Here I am safe and I’m not scared. It’s a decent life, we can go see a doctor. It’s by itself enough that we are not with ISIS here. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion? H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota? H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Can you tell us what doesn’t make you feel glad about the project?
R: As I’ve told, we are all living in a small, confined place, it’s not good. We would be glad if we could each move to a house, in our own houses. Also, our families are still in Iraq. 2 of my brothers are still there. We are separated, all feeling lonely, that’s not good.
I: How old are your brothers?
R: One is 14, and the other is 15.
R: Husbands and families of many women are also in Iraq. Women are here lonely. We would be so thankful if we are re-united with our loved ones. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future? H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)? H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: What gives you hope for the future? Where does your hope come from?
R: In my situation, I can’t have positive thoughts about future.
I: Don’t you have any hopes?
R: No, I can’t feel the slightest hope without my family. I am going to school but my mind is always elsewhere. I can only think about my family.
I: I understand. I hope you will see them again.