Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
Audio file name: [030]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself. C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim. C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you? C02 Tu çend salî yî? C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
C04 What is your marital status? C04 Tu zewiciyi yan na? C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?
R: Yes.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner? C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?” C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
I: Where is your spouse?
R: My spouse is lost.
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any? C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn? C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: How many people are staying here together?
R: You mean how many we are here?
I: I mean you and your family.
R: Me and my four children
I: Four children?
R: Four children and me. Two boys and two girls.
C07 Who are they? C07 Ew kî ne? C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)? C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language? C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn? C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Do you know how to read and write?
R: No, I can’t read and write. Not at a good level.
C10 What is your highest education level? C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Have you gone school, how many years?
R: Well.
I: Were you attending school in Iraq?
R: I was going to school in Iraq. But it wasn’t good.
C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
I: Till what grade did you go to school?
R: I finished sixth grade. But I wasn’t in a fine state then either. I mean not like now. Our teachers were Kurmanji. They didn’t push us much. That’s why we couldn’t learn.
C12 Are you currently in school? C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)? C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Are you going to school now?
R: Yes.
I: German classes?
R: Yes.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future? C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî, tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê? C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed? C14 Tu nahe kar diki? C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you working anywhere now, are you employed?
R: No. I’m not doing anything.
C15 If yes, what is your current work? C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî? C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment? C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki? C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: If you complete the course would you like to be employed?
R: Yes.
C18 If not, why not? C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki? C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home? C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir? C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before Iraq entered your place where employed anywhere in Iraq?
R: No.
I: Did you have a job?
R: No. I was with my spouse and children. I didn’t have a job.
I: So, you were married. Taking care of your kids.
R: I was at home. Looking after the kids. I wasn’t working outside of the home. 
C20 If yes, what was your work? C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir? C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any? C22 dine te chiya? C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What’s your religion, are you Yazidi or Muslim?
R: I am Yazidi.
C23 Please specify your religion C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group? C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî? C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: What nation are you, your people?
R: Kocho people.
I: Yazidi, Kurmanji, Alewite?
R: Yazidi.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye? C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS Pêşik û Şertên niha Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: Thank you very much for your responses. Now there’s another question. What’s worrying you now, what’s bothering you?
R: Honestly, life is difficult. Our trials and tribulations are heavy. And we have gone through a lot. 
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today? D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye? D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What is it that you think constantly about currently?
R: Honestly, I constantly think of my husband now. Then I think of my brother. I think of his children. And then I think of myself and for my children. 
I: Because your spouse isn’t here?
R: My husband isn’t here. I’ve got daughters. It’s tough.
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life? D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe? D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you require now to sustain your life, I mean what do you need?
R: I swear if only our captives were to be returned to us, if I could see them, I don’t want anything else.
I: I mean what do you need to sustain yourself?
R: It’s tough. Life doesn’t change. What we’ve been through, what we’ve seen it’s all the same life. It’s tough for this pain to change.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now? D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye? D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Now I’m going to ask you some questions and you’re going to say how much.
R: Ok.
I: How much are you in control of your life, from zero to four.
R: Honestly, it’s not for myself. I must stand on mine two feet, I must gather my strength. For these four children. I have to.
I: So, you have strength?
R: I must take care of my children. I’m responsible for them. There’s no one else. 
I: Can we say a lot?
R: It’s necessary.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you? D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye? D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What are your thoughts on the future?
R: I really don’t know.
I: You don’t know. What’s to happen for you in the future.
R: What’s going to happen. What’s going to happen to us. We can’t make sense of ourselves.
I: I understand. So, you don’t know what the future holds in store for you.
R: I really don’t know. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live? D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî? D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: Let’s say things got better in Iraq, peace is established, ISIS is gone. Would you want to return to Iraq or Kurdistan or some other city or would you like to remain in Germany?
R: Well.
I: Let’s say things had improved.
R: Even if the situation was good and well I’ll never return to Iraq so long as my husband isn’t returned to me. 
I: Never?
R: Never.
I: If he returned to you?
R: If returns and things are nice in Iraq I’d return then. Now I don’t know. Then he’d say come to Iraq things are better here and I’d say you come here. I don’t know right now. If they take care of us and help us we would stay in Germany. We have nothing left in Iraq.
I: I understand.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location? D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir? D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany? D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe? D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel like you belong in Germany?
R: Honestly, Germany didn’t hesitate to do everything to help us.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years? D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû? D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: Yes. Does this mean you’ve liked Germany?
R: Honestly, sometimes we are bothered. Sometimes we are busy with the kids. We remember our home, we recall our state. Nowhere is like someone’s own country. It’s unforgettable. 
I: So, you’ve been in Germany for two years?
R: Yes.
I: So how has your two years of experience in Germany been?
R: My pain is really a lot.
I: Yes, your husband isn’t with you. You’re hurt.
R: I feel hurt a lot. And my life hasn’t changed. I’m like I was in the past. No matter how much I try it’s like the past. 
I: I understand you.
R: I’m taking psychiatric medication. 
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way? D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin? D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe? D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye? D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: Let’s say you wanted to return to Iraq but things aren’t good in Iraq, what would need to be in Iraq for you to be able to return?
R: What?
I: I mean what would need to happen in Iraq for you to say fine, it’s over, I can return.
R: No.
I: So, you won’t return no matter what?
R: Yes.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic. E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you? E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be? E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: Do you know what justice is, I mean what comes to your mind when someone says justice? What is justice to you, or should I ask what do you expect from justice?
R: Honestly, justice for me is my husband and brother returning. Not something else. If only they’d return to me and I shan’t have seen anything else till the end of the world. 
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS? E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e? E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How can you claim you due from ISIS?
R: Well, whatever they do, even if they kill them all we’ll never get our due after what they’ve put us through.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice? E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in? E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: Do you believe justice will be done to you?
R: Well there’s nothing difficult for God. God willing we’ll get justice too.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions? E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete? E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it to you that ISIS is punished because of these bad things they brought upon you?
R: It’s very important.
I: A lot?
R: As much as you can think.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way? E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da? E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Why is it a lot?
R: Because they’ve done us a lot of bad.
I: Tell me if you’re keeping anything inside.
R: I have so much inside. It can’t be said. It won’t end even if I tell you till daybreak.
E06 Who should be held accountable? E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye? E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: There commanders, governors, women and children within ISIS. When punishing them, do you think of punishing them all or just the governors and commanders?
R: When I was taken and arrested as a prisoner it was the eighth day of the third month. Me and my children. From my family my elder brother and mother were with me. They arrested us in Sinjar.
I: Wait, let me tell these to them so I don’t forget.
I: Now, I’m going to ask you other questions, we can then later return to the issue of your arrest, ok.
R: Ok.
E07 And how should they be held accountable? E07 çawa? E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: In your opinion what should be done to ISIS, if something were to done, what would you want it to be?
R: Honestly, I don’t know what the outcome is going to be.
I: What would you want them to happen?
R: What type of evil would I cause them. I’d kill their spouses. I’d take their children away in plain sight. I’d take their women and girls. I’d forcibly take their children from their fathers right in front of them. They too would burn for this.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike? E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Have you ever heard, there some people and institutions they come and catch ISIS people and judge them
R: No.
E09 If yes, which ones? E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in? E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence? E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin? E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: If the ISIS people came and asked for your forgiveness, would you forgive them?
R: It’s not possible.
I: Why?
R: I mean how can I forgive? Why would I forgive? They can never be forgiven. If it was up to me I wouldn’t forgive a single one of them. 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive? E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki? E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic. E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it to you to be aware of the news from Iraq, I mean of what is going on?
R: It’s very important.
I: Do you desire very much to know?
R: Well, yes.
I: Why?
R: Because of those captives. Just so that they’d say one child was freed today.
I: I understand.
R: Now there’s nothing that’s important to us. There’s nothing important to me other than our taken.
I: I understand.
R: Our spouses are captives.
I: How important is it to you to know what ISIS is doing in Iraq right now?
R: Very important.
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it to for the whole world to know what ISIS has done to the Yazidis? 
R: Very important.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: Would you want the children of your children to know as well?
R: I want that very much. The whole world ought to know and shouldn’t forget, it’s unforgettable.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened? E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu? E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why, why is that you want the whole world to and your children to know?
R: So that they know what befell us. What they brought upon us. We aren’t guilty of anything. There was no cause, there was no reason, we hadn’t caused any damage. They brought all this upon us.
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened? E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu? E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What needs to be done so that everyone knows what happened to the Yazidis?
R: It must be broadcast on TV. I mean they should talk like you are and ask our opinions. We want all means to be used so that everyone knows. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission? E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)? E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you ever heard of something called the justice commission?
R: No, I haven’t. 
I: Never heard of it?
R: No. 
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes? E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre? E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: I must explain to you the justice commission so that you know. This is a commission set by governments and they send them there to investigate the ISIS brutalities. Then they write up all that has transpired. I mean like we are doing with you now. Then they draft a report. In your opinion would such a commission suffice or would other things need to be done, I mean like would many other things need to be on ISIS?
R: Yes.
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS? E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish? E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: In your opinion, how can the victims of ISIS be helped, what needs to be done for these people?
R: Well, they have to be helped. I mean if people like who have three or four children were helped and brought to these countries. This is a good thing.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis? E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe? E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: Ok, what needs to be done for the Yazidis?
R: For Yazidis. People must be helped. People are in wretched state in these tents and caravans. When the world is hot they burn, when it is cold they freeze. And they have no jobs nor can they work. Everyone is uncomfortable and miserable. I mean it’s not safe where they are. 
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim? E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen? E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Now when you look at yourself in the mirror do you see yourself as a victim of ISIS, is it obvious?
R: Well yes.
I: A lot?
R: A lot.
E23 Why do you feel that way? E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin? E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why, how do you recognize it, why do you see yourself as one of them?
R: Honestly, I see myself as one of them. They kept me for nine months. We didn’t know when they were going to kill us. They going to kill our children in front of our eyes. That’s why I cannot forget.
I: You were a captive for nine months?
R: Yes.
PEACE Aşitî Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions. F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim. F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq? F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)? F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think a peace and tranquility is possible in Iraq?
R: Difficult.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries? F02 Û li fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her welêtiki?” F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you know the situation in the Middle East, the Arab cities, Syria. Do you think peace will be possible there?
R: No.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? F03 Ji bo aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe? F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: Why do you say there can’t be peace in Iraq?
R: There won’t. So long as one Muslim remains there, it can’t be done.
I: All Muslims or a part of them?
R: All of them. It’s all because of them.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS? F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe? F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Have you heard that Iraqi soldiers have ousted ISIS from there, what’s your opinion on this?
R: Yes.
I: Is this a good thing for you or does it not help?
R: It is good. They took Mosul and Tal Afar.
I: Who, the soldiers?
R: The soldiers cleaned these places up and came. And many captives were freed.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq? F05 Û ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe? F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What according to you needs to be done to protect the Yazidis in Iraq?
R: Safeguarding?
I: How will they be safeguarded in Iraq?
R: If they had a place they could trust so that these decrees don’t befall them.
I: So, what do the Yazidis need?
R: Well they need many things.
I: Like what?
R: Like everything. If they had protection, if they had someone to rely on. If they’d relocate Yazidis to a specific location and they could protect themselves. 
I: You mean a protection that only involves Yazidis?
R: Yes.
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through. G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS? G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)? G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: You’ve come to Germany two years ago, right?
R: Yes.
I: Have you been speaking on the bad things that have happened to you since came, for example do you tell that this and that happened to you, how often do you speak, is it every day, once a week or month?
R: We don’t see anyone. We were twelve families here. It has been two years six have gone six remain.
I: Do you talk with each other?
R: We just talk to each other. We don’t talk with anyone else. 
I: Every day or sometimes?
R: No not every day. Sometimes.
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you? G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)? G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you? G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin) G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to. G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin) G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Do you talk with your friends or family on what they did to you?
R: Well yes of course.
I: Have you ever been to a psychologist?
R: Yes, I go to psychologist every month. 
I: Do you talk with social workers on what they did to you?
R: No. Only when we first came we spoke a lot.
I: Have you spoken about your experiences with the radio or TV?
R: Here?
I: Yes.
R: No, I never have.
I: Not just here, here or Iraq, have you been on TV in Iraq?
R: Not on TV but we did interviews. I mean, about what happened, what was done to us.
I: So, was there an investigation, was there a lawyer?
R: Yes.
I: Do you write on Facebook on what befell you?
R: No.
G05 If other, please specify G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper? G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû, (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu? G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER Heger parêzer be Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer? G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû? G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them? G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we yan hûn chun jem ? G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer? G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ? G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
I: Do you know what happened to the information you’ve provided?
R: I really don’t know why they took, for what reason they took it.
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them? G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt? G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
I: After you came here have those investigators ever spoken with you?
R: No.
I: This questioning happened only in Iraq right, has anything like this happened after your arrival in Germany?
R: No.
IF POLICE [Heger shirteye) Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them? G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ? G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police? G12 hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete te bi shertede deyi ? G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them? G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt? G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book? G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî? G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Since arriving in Germany have you ever written for yourself about what happened? 
R: Many times.
I: So, you’re writing.
R: No. Not writing.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you? G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin? G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written. G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)? G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS? G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin? G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since arriving in Germany how often do you follow up on news regarding ISIS, what’s going on in Iraq, every day?
R: Every day.
I: News about them?
R: Every day.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)? G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)? G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you want to keep up with the news?
R: I very much want to be updated on the news.
I: But why?
R: I mean for myself, for our captured ones. For those remaining, how it is, how it will be, who has escaped, who is coming, who will come, these are the reasons I want it so much.
G20 Where do you seek information? G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin? G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: What sources do you use? Just say yes or no when I ask. Do you ask your friends and family?
R: Yes.
I: Facebook, do use the internet?
R: Yes.
I: Radio, TV?
R: TV is always in German.
I: Newspaper? 
R: No.
G21 If other, please specify G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one? G22 hûn û malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: How do you make contact with your Yazidi friends and people you know, I mean do you call by telephone?
R: Yes.
I: Do you use WhatsApp?
R: Yes.
I: Do you talk over Facebook?
R: Yes.
G23 If other, please specify G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
I: Is there anything else, are these all?
R: Yes, that’ all.
TRAUMA TRAÛMA TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question. H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri) H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS? VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin? VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: Now we are going to ask you some questions if you wish not answer them just say so, Ok?
R: Ok.
I: What people are you?
R: Kocho people, Sinjar.
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity? VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man? VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: You were arrested by ISIS, how long were you held captive for?
R: Nine months.
I: Can you tell me, were you arrested with your children?
R: Yes.
I: How about your spouse?
R: He was not with us. He was in another vehicle. I was with my brother, mother and my children. 
I: Where did they take after capturing you?
R: They apprehended us on the third day of the eighth month in the village of Kocho.
I: Were you still at the village on the third day of eighth month?
R: We were still in the village, in Kocho. Up until the Peshmerga fled.
I: It’s not important if you don’t know the dates. I just want to know what happened. What happened to you after Kocho?
R: Alright I’ll tell you. We were still in Kocho on the third day of the eighth month. About nine o’clock the Peshmerga fled from our village. And we left the village.
I: Then?
R: We left Kocho. With my brother’s car. His family me and my children. This was still in my womb. My other three children. We hit the road. Went to Sinjar. We were going to go the hills from there. We got caught in Sinjar.
I: You got caught in Sinjar.
R: They caught us in Sinjar.
I: Where did they take you after they caught you, where was your husband?
R: Honestly, I didn’t see my husband.
I: When were you separated from him, after you left Kocho?
R: I didn’t see him after the morning we left Kocho.
I: Then you went to Sinjar and you got caught in Sinjar, then what?
R: We were caught in Sinjar.
I: Where did ISIS take you?
R: Us, my uncles’ family and the two families of my two cousins and along with a lot of people form our village as well the people of Sinjar, they gathered us all together. They rained bullets on us.
I: Where did they take you?
R: They gathered us there. But what gathering! Then a Muslim woman came. She had a Quran in her hand. She was grumbling. Then they told to go to our village. They told us to run. They redirected us to Sinjar.
I: Where did they take to after Sinjar?
R: They put us in a very large building. No doors or windows. It was still being constructed.
I: In Sinjar?
R: Yes.
I: No doors or windows?
R: There was nothing. It was still being built.
I: Did they tell you to stay there?
R: They took us out of there. Didn’t take us anywhere. One of the guys with us, there were many men with us, he was someone we knew, he was from our village. They took him by the hand and took him away beating on him. A little farther they shot right in front of our eyes. He was someone I knew, he was from my village.
I: Then?
R: They shot him right in front of us in that square. Directed us to Sinjar.
I: They took you back to Sinjar?
R: Took us back to Sinjar. They said let’s see what you’ve got with you. They took all the money and gold we had with us. They didn’t leave anything, they took everything.
I: What did you after you returned to Sinjar?
R: They took all our money and gold. Then they separated the men and women. They took us to the Population of Sinjar
I: Population?
R: It’s a government office.
I: Oh, I get it.
R: They took the men inside and us to the courtyard. 
I: Did they separate the young and the old women?
R: They separated us. We waited till evening. The sun went down. It got dark. Then we saw that they opened the large gates. The gate of the courtyard. They brought large vehicles. Then they stormed us. Then they didn’t leave a single girl amongst our ranks.
I: They took all the girls?
R: They took all of them. Their screams and cries. They were holding on to their mothers. They’d take them by force and put them in the vehicles.
I: To sell?
R: That evening they didn’t leave a single girl from among us. They were even taking those like me who didn’t yet have a child or didn’t have their child with them.
I: Did they take you too?
R: No. this one was with me. They weren’t taking those who had kids with them. 
I: You stayed, where did ISIS take you?
R: After they took away all the girls from among us. We stayed there that day. Then they took us along with the men to a place that’s called Laqa in the Kurdish language. That was their place of governance at the same time. It was a big and beautiful building. 
I: For how long did you stay there?
R: They took and forced us inside. We stayed there for two nights.
I: Two nights?
R: Two nights.
I: Please continue...
R: They made us all sit there that night. We were very many. Then they came. They said as of this point get up. They separated them and took them away. We remained.
I: You stayed there? 
R: Yes, we stayed.
I: Where did you go, later on?
R: They came in the morning and said let’s go. Get out. They boarded us onto large vehicles too. And took us away.
I: You didn’t know where to?
R: We’d never know where to.
I: They drove us for a while, somewhere close to Mosul
I: Somewhere close to Mosul?
R: Close to Mosul. The people we were with understood this was the Badush prison.
I: What happened then?
R: Well they put us in prison.
I: Prison?
R: Yes. We stayed there for six or seven days.
I: Then?
R: I apologize. Then they took us to Tal Afar. Tal Afar prison. We stayed for six or seven days in Tal Afar.
I: And after Tal Afar?
R: After Tal Afar, they took us to Badush prison.
I: Where is that?
R: Great Mosul Badush Prison.
R: Later after having stayed for five or six days in Badush they brought us back to the prison in Tal Afar.
I: How long did you stay in Tal Afar?
R: In all the prisons of Tal Afar and Badush I stayed for a total of sixteen days. 
I: You said you stayed for nine months with ISIS. Where?
R: I stayed for sixteen days in prison. I gave birth on the fourteenth day of the eighth month in prison. My daughter was born. 
I: You gave birth to your daughter in prison?
R: My daughter was born in prison.
I: What happened after your daughter’s birth?
R: They took us out after my daughter’s birth. On the fifteenth of the month they brought all the women of and children of our village to where we were. They took all the men. They killed them all. The next day they took all of us out into the big field. Again, the big vehicles came. They loaded us.
I: Loaded?
R: Took us to a village. Close to Tal Afar a village called Kasrul Mihra. It was close to Tal Afar.
I: What happened after you went to Kasrul Mihra, how long did you stay there?
R: After they brought us they placed in a Shia home. They had fled too. I stayed for five months in that village.
I: You stayed for five months in Kasrul Mihra, what then?
R: Then again, they brought vehicles whose tops were covered with nylon and gathered us. They loaded us again. 
I: Where did you go?
R: They loaded and took us again. They brought us to the center of Tal Afar. They’d call a part of Tal Afar Hayrel Hatra. That too was one of their cities. 
I: What after arriving in Hayrel Hatra?
R: Then we stayed there for three days. 
I: Yes?
R: Then they brought us back to Mosul.
I: You returned to Mosul?
R: We returned to Mosul again. It was a big building. It was winter. I stayed for a month.
I: One month?
R: One month. Men, women, kids all together.
I: Yes.
R: We stayed there. Then they came again. They stormed us. The remaining girls and women with children. They grabbed whomever they wished and took them to Syria. My aunt was with us, she was taken. They severed many of us and took to Syria. Me, my mother, one cousin and my children we stayed.
I: In Mosul?
R: We stayed. We stayed with my uncle’s son’s family, his wife and these. When we were left on our won they made us tend their sheep.
I: So, for how long did you tend their sheep?
R: A month and a half. We stayed there. There was nothing around us. 
I: Was it meadows?
R: It was a meadow. We tended their sheep. We stayed for a month half in mud and muck and that was that.
R. There was another family with us. They weren’t one of us. But they too were Yazidi. They tended the sheep with us too for one and half months. 
I: Then?
R: We left one night, we said they can either kill us or we’d be freed.
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape? VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin? VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: How did you escape?
R: We ran. Really. We escaped one night. God helped us. 
I: You escaped?
R: We escaped.
I: Did you go to Kurdistan?
R: We went and arrived at the Peshmerga. Yes, Kurdistan.
I: You, your mother, your cousin and your children, right?
R: Yes. Along with my uncle’s son and his family and another Yazidi family. We were thirty in all.
I: So, you reached Kurdistan and you were freed.
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being? H01 chiqes pisbune daishe ( ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend? H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: Has this bad experience you lived through affected your health?
R: Honestly, it did.
I: How?
R: Too much pain. When we returned to our village I didn’t know what had happened. My husband had returned to the village then. They’d arrested him and told him to go back to the village, it’s no problem. So, they’d returned to the village. We were under arrest for nine months. I had no news about my clan. We understood what had befallen us after we were freed and had returned to out village. 
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being? H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê chu saxbuna we bedilend? H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: Has all this impacted your health, I mean is your health better or worse now?
R: Honestly, it is worse. It couldn’t be worse.
I: So, it has impacted you very much?
R: Very much. I say my head aches. Pains. Suddenly my feet ache, then suddenly my head aches.
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced? H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine? H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now I’m going to ask you some situations and you’ll tell me whether you have them or not, OK? I mean this experience, this bad experience you’ve had, has it ever caused an illness for you, have you got a sickness?
R: Well, yes. I’ve got pains.
I: I mean your limbs, hands, arms, hand, or head?
R: Yes. My head aches, my legs ache. Sometimes my whole body aches. I don’t why my whole aches. 
H04 Pain H04 Êş (eshek) H04 Schmerz
I: So, you have pains?
R: Yes.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause) H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you itch?
R: A lot.
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties) H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi) H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you feel weak and feeble?
R: A lot.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling) H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be herzin/dejerfen H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you faint?
R: No.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder) H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Are your eyes fine, do you see well?
R: Not really, my eyes are sensitive.
I: Your ears?
R: They are fine.
I: But your eyes are not?
R: My eyes are not well.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel short of breath?
R: On some days very much. Some days it is fine.
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance) H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte wekî dinya li dora we digere H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you get dizzy?
R: Sometimes.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats) H11 dle ta deshe H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Heart, do you have heart problems?
R: No. It is fine.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea) H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
H13 Do you have any other symptoms? H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)? H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group Group 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned? H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn? H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
I: How is your head?
R: Yes, I’ve got headaches.
I: Does your head ache every day?
R: Every day.
I: Do you take medication, what do you do?
R: I’ve been taking medication since my arrival, I go to the doctor, they say it doesn’t do me any good.
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine? H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
I: Have you got any other ailments other than headaches?
R: Excuse me?
I: Have you got any other issues aside from headaches?
R: To be honest, I’ve got almost no part that is fine.
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any? H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye? H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health? H18 Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin? H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health: H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir? H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: What is the cause of your headache?
R: The reason for my headache is the pains that have befallen us.
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence) H20 Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel) H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: That bad experience brought on by ISIS, has it impacted your psychology? 
R: Yes, very much so.
I: A lot?
R: A lot.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction) H21 lashe ta, misal (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Well what about your body?
R: It has affected it all.
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms) H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi) H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins) H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you think that all these that befell you, what ISIS has done, do you think they were done by God or do you think that they have nothing to do with God?
R: May these all be sacrificed to God.
I: So, they are from God?
R: Of course they are.
I: So, you’re saying this is God’s punishment to you?
R: No. [incomprehensible …]
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people? H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye navbera we u milete kiri? H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: Has this bad experience impacted your social life, I mean when you talk, make friends?
R: It’s not good, really. It isn’t like it used to be.
I: Have you changed?
R: Yes.
I: A lot?
R: Yes.
I: How so, can you now make friends easily or is it not like it was in the past?
R: No there is nothing about me that has remained like before.
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community? H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye? H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: How are your relations with the Yazidi community do you feel distant?
R: No.
I: Is it like before?
R: It’s like before.
I: So, the way you perceive a Yazidi person is the same, you’re still a Yazidi, you are with Yazidis and your relations are unchanged?
R: Naturally so. Yes, it is like as it was in the past, there is no change.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion? H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî? H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith? H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we? H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Has there been any change in your faith after this bad experience with ISIS, I mean has your faith in Yazidism increased or decreased now, I mean are you still a Yazidi with faith, do you understand me?
R: You mean you’re asking whether I believe in Yazidism or nor?
I: Yes. I mean is it like it was before, or has it increased or has it decreased?
R: Well nothing is like it was in the past. But it is good.
I: But you have faith in your God and your creed?
R: Naturally so.
I: So, your faith hasn’t changed?
R: Yes, it hasn’t changed.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith? H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari) we ji bo diyanet yizidi? H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence? H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî? H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: What do you do cope?
R: I really don’t do anything.
I: You don’t go out, wander about?
R: Well I do go out and I do wander. I tend the kids. I do house chores. I see friends.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief? H30 çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)? H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: You’d said your head aches. Do you take any medication?
R: Yes.
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence? H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê : H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now I’m going to ask you some things and you’ll tell me whether you have it a lot or a little.
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family) H32 te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet) H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Do you feel that people around you, the Yazidis are trying to help you?
R: Yes, I feel that.
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength) H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî) H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe that you can stand on your two feet, that you can be free of this trouble?
R: That will be tough.
I: I mean do you believe that as an individual you’ll be able to make it on your own?
R: Well, yes of course I believe that.
I: You believe?
R: I do believe.
I: Ok.
I: A lot or normal?
R: Well, not a lot.
I: Not much?
R: Not much.
H34 Praying H34 limê kirin H34 Beten
I: Do you ever pray for yourself, do you invoke God?
R: A lot.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone) H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Do you want to spend time on your own, to be alone?
R: Honestly, I never thought of that.
I: You don’t like it?
R: Never occurred to me.
I: You don’t like to be alone. You want to have people about you?
R: Yes.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS) H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we) H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you speak with each other about what has befallen you, is it good for you?
R: Naturally. When you open up to someone it is relieving. 
I: Yes, that is right.
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists) H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst) H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Do you visit a psychologist? 
R: Yes.
I: Do you still visit them?
R: Yes.
I: Does it help you, have you benefited from it?
R: A lot.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39 alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: When you speak with Yazidis that are far away, is that good for you?
R: Yes.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope? H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe. H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you do anything else to cope?
R: Not really.
I: Some women draw, is there anything you busy yourself with?
R: Well, we’re going to school now. I sometimes don’t understand some things. No matter how hard I try my mind doesn’t change.
Group Group 
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being. H45 Niha ezê navê reya bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: Now I’m going to ask you these and you’ll tell whether you have it or not.
R: Ok.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood) H46 îlaç (derman) H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Are you taking any psychological medication?
R: Yes.
I: For your psychology?
R: Yes.
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi) H47 Psychologen
I: Are you seeing a psychologist? 
R: Yes, I am.
H48 Individual psychotherapy H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Do you visit the doctor on your own or are you accompanied by a translator?
R: There is a translator with me.
I: So, there are the three of you, yourself, the doctor and the translator?
R: Yes.
H49 Group psychotherapy H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari) H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Have you been to Lalesh?
R: Yes.
I: Was it good for you?
R: (incomprehensible)
H51 Herbal medicine H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati) H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Do you take any medication for your body?
R: No, I’m not taking any.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare) H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan) H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Are the women at social work helpful?
R: Very much.
H53 Doctor or physician H53 toxter? H53 Ärzte
I: Do you go to a normal doctor, not a psychologist?
R: Yes.
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help? H54 Toxter: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: When you go to the doctor has it been helpful to you?
R: Very very much.
H55 If medication: how much did it help? H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: What about the psychological medications are they beneficial?
R: Yes.
I: Is it good?
R: Good. Very much so.
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help? H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Has speaking with a psychologist been good for you?
R: Quite a lot.
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help? H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Do you feel relieved when you speak?
R: Yes, it helps me very well. They say that they wish they could help me more.
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help? H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help? H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Has going to Lalesh been good to you or has it made it worse?
R: Well, it disturbed me.
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help? H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help? H61 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Is the help form social good to you, are they helping you a lot?
R: They are very good.
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike? H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: Now how do you understand that the psychologist, regular doctor, social are helpful to you, are you better because of them, I mean is your psychology or health better?
R: Much.
I: How so, I mean what type of help does it provide I mean in what way are you better when they assist you?
R: Well they make an effort for us. We go to the doctors. I had some aches and I told social. And they took us to the doctor. If we need something they hustle.
I: The social sent you to school too didn’t it?
R: Yes.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet? H64 Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye? H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Now apart from the social, the psychologist, the regular doctor and all the help they provide, is there anything else you need?
R: Honestly, I don’t need anything else.
I: You have no other need?
R: No.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Now I’m going to ask you some things. You tell me whether you have it or not.
R: Ok.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: Do you still at times remember the past bad experiences?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: You mean, about the times I spent with them.
I: I mean those feelings are like as if you are there all over again?
R: Very much so.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu) H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have sleep issues; do you wake up often from your sleep?
R: Very much.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Is there anything that you see or hear that reminds you of those bad experiences?
R: I see many bad things in my dreams when I sleep and am very disturbed when I wake up in the morning.
I: Are there any particular things that makes you remember, or do you just remember them when you’re alone?
R: I remember them often.
H69 I felt irritable and angry H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you feel angry?
R: Honestly, I get very angry sometimes.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist. H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: When you recall those bad experiences do you feel you’re trying not to think of them and push them out of your mind?
R: I get disturbed. I cry a lot. I feel relaxed after crying. I feel relieved.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Do they come to your mind involuntarily? For example, you’re sitting now and you don’t want them but they suddenly pop in your mind?
R: Yes. It is often like that.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Have you ever felt like this bad experience was a dream?
R: Yes.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist. H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you find yourself resisting from thinking of them?
R: Often
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind H74 suret e ten sari ta H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: When you close your eyes do their faces pop in your mind?
R: Often
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Do you tremble, do you feel afraid?
R: Often. My feet feel numb.
H76 I tried not to think about it H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim. H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you ever try not to think?
R: Often. I want never to think.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie. H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: Do you find yourself thinking and you try not to think about them?
R: Often.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder) H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: When you are thinking, do you feel numb from fear or pain?
R: Yes.
I: A lot or a little?
R: Normal.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir. H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: When you are thinking, do you feel as if you were back at that time?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: A lot.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir. H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have problems falling asleep, not being able to sleep turning about in bed?
R: Yes, a lot.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Do you sweat when you are thinking?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: A lot.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim. H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Have you tried to not have these thoughts at all?
R: Yes, I try. But it’s not possible.
I: Do you try a lot or normal?
R: Well, normal. Not much.
H83 I had trouble concentrating H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir. H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you have problems concentrating, are you in your right mind?
R: Sometimes I do, sometimes not.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: When you think do you sweat and get heart throbs?
R: Yes, it happens.
I: How much, normal?
R: Normal.
H85 I had dreams about it H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît. H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you see dreams?
R: A lot.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir. H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel watchful. It’s not frightened, like do you get the shivers?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: Normal.
H87 I tried not to talk about it H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim. H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Do you speak of what has happened or do you not talk?
R: Honestly, I do speak.
H88 Thank you for these responses. H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I: Thank you for your answers. Few questions left. We’re finishing up.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany? H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne? H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: What are your good experiences in Germany?
R: In Germany?
I: In Germany. What has been good to you?
R: Honestly what has been done to me is very good. They brought us here. Our children, us, all of us. We had no one. Taking care of us without us working for it. Countless things they’ve done for us. They never held anything back.
I: Now they brought you here as the situation called for it. Other than these what has been good for you in Germany?
R: They’ve been good to me.
I: Any experiences?
R: The experience was good to me. How so?
I: For example, there are some women. When I asked them this some said school some said work?
R: I too would say school has been very helpful. My children go to school. They should be cultured. I mean it is very good to be without fear, secure and in comfort.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time? H90 tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu? H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: About the official project that brought you to Germany, what have you been pleased with about it?
R: I’m very pleased. They brought us here. They take care of us, take us to the doctor. Take our children to school. I mean they’ve taken care of our community, placed them in homes.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion? H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota? H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion? H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota? H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Is there anything negative about the project that brought you here that you’d want to change?
R: Honestly, I haven’t seen anything that’s bad in this.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future? H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)? H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: From what do you get your hope for life now?
R: Honestly, my hope comes from God.
I: We’ve finished our questions. I thank you very very much. You’ve come. Thank you for everything. Is there anything you’d like to ask us?
R: There isn’t a thing.
I: There isn’t? 
R: No.
I: You’re sure you won’t have a biscuit? Come here, just take one, take one for yourself?
I: Thank you for coming.
R: Not at all.