Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [036 RSJ]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: N ow we have questions about your personalit. You said that you are 28 years old. Right?
R: Yes.
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?
R: Yes.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
I: Where is your husband?
R: Gone.
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: How many persons do you live with here?
R: 4
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
I: Who are they?
R: How?
I: You have two children… Gets interrupted 
R: I have two children and Hanif and her children as well. Hanif is a name of a female 
I: How old are they?
R: Mirna is 6 and Ameer is 3.5 and a girl is still in captivity.
I: How old is she?
R: 10 years old.
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Can you write a simple language in a language?
R: I do not know to write anything.  It is fine, she can write by herself by I cannot myself. “she” refers to interviewer 
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Do you have a degree? How many years have you gone to school?
R: I have not.
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Are you going to the German course now?
R: Yes.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you working?
R: No.
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Are you seeking for a job?
R: No. As long as I have this thinking, I do not seek for a job.
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
I: Why not?
R: I forget myself. 
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before ISIS attack you, were you working?
R: Yes. Work of agriculture.
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R: My religion is Ezidi.
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: What is you ethnic group?
R: Ezidi.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: Now we have some questions about the future.
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: Currently, what have you out for yourself?
R: In Iraq?
I: In both, Iraq and here.
R: Honestly, we think a lot about those who are in Iraq as their situation is bad. Everyday, something occurs. They are in the camps and sometimes they do not get water in their house and the weather is hot. The electricity is bad. When people support them, we beome happy. Now, we are too satisfied as they have brought us here brcaue we would not be able to feed our children in there.
I: Here in Germany?
R: It is very good. I reveal that in them as they get smart. She means Germans
R: When ISIS caught us, we had nothing but now our children are happy even if our psychology is not good.
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: Currentl, what is important for you in life or future? What do you need?
R: If it was up to me, I would want many things. For example, we would want my daughter to survive, even if the cost would be my life. 
I: The one who is still in captivity?
R: Yes.
I: What do you need to establish your life? Or stabilize your life?
R: I have not established anything for myself until now. I just think of my daughter. 
I: what do you need to start your life again in here?
R: I need my daughter too much. If she comes, my life will be better as well as my psychology.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: How much control do you have over your life? How much would you give yourself, from 0 to 4?
R: 1
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think that your future will be?
R: My only thinking is my daughter. I do not sleep in nights and when I sleep sometimes I see ISIS in my dream and they kill us. If my daughter comes, my life will be improved. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If Iraq gets better, where will you live? Will you remain in Germany or Kurdistan or somewhere else in Iraq?
R: I will remain in Germany because we have nobody. Who will take care of me and my children? 
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel that you are home in Germany?
R: Yes.
I: How much? 0 is the worst and 4 is the best.
R: 0 when we came to Germany first time. Now, 2 I would say for myself.  She does not understand the question
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: What you would say about what you have been in Germany since two years? How was what you have seen so far?
R: It was very good. Children are very happy.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If you were return to Iraq or Kurdistan, what should be changed in order to feel safe?
R: I did not understand from you.
I: If you return to Iraq, what need to be changed in order to feel safe?
R: Good things to happen just as before ISIS attack us but it is difficult to be like that.
I: What should government do for safe to happen?
R: We want to have our protection for our safety. 
I: Protection from where?
R: From any country wants to. People want to go home from those camps. They need protection. Everyday, IEDs explode to some people. That day, one exploded and resulted to killing a person and injuring one. 
I: We are sorry.
R: Two of our cousins are Peshmerga and while they were going to Sinjar via Rabia, an IED exploded in front of them but thankfully they got safe. 
I: When?
R: Two days ago. 8 persons have been taken to Hospital but others were fine. Therfore, we think a lot such things, that is why we are not good.
I: Everyday, there is news coming.
R: Everuday, there is news. As we hear it, we become unhappy and we cannot control ourselves.
I: I understand from you. When such bad news come, people become uncomfortable. So now I will ask some questions about justice.
R: Ok
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: What does justice mean to you?
R: Justice?
I: Rights.
R: We want countries to help because what happened to us is a lot.
I: What should those countries do in order you have your rights? 
R: We want our people back who are in captivity. We think of them abd because everyday airplanes kill some of them. We want our rights available everywhere because all of you know that we are poor and we have nothing. Also, we will not forget what ISIS have done to us as long as we are alive. Specially when they caught us and separated women, killed men, took children and killed them.
I: I am sorry for what have had happened to you. This question is ended. 
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: You will answer us on this paper. How much important is it for you to have your rights after ISIS?
R: 4.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: How much do you believe that oneday you will have your rights?
R: It is difficult. 3. She does not understand very well the numbers technique of evaluation. 
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How much important is it for you, ISIS to be held accountable after for what they have done to you?
R: It is important. 4. They have done a lot to us. We will not forget. When we hear that ISIS get killed, we become happy.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who should be held accountable first? Is there any difference for you between an ISIS leader and others?
R: All of them are same.
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: What kind of punishment is suitable for them?
R: Killing them in front of them. If we would have them, we would want to kill them by ourselves.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Have you heard that there are efforts to bring ISIS to justice or court?
R: No, I have not heard. Only Abu Hamza who said kill all people in my viilage, has been arrested and he is paralyzed. He is with America and no one will see him.
I: Where is he?
R: I do not know but it has been said that he is with Amercia or under Amercans’ control. I know that he has been arrested. He was coming to our village to see our community leader. Finally, he said that all people should be killded in the village. 
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Can you forgive those who have done this to you?
R: No, I will not
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: What should happen in order to forgive them?
R: I will not forgive what they haave done to me and my children as long as I am alive.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: You will answer us on this paper. How much important is it for you to know what happened to you? 
R: 3. I want that everone knows what happened to us. My children and I were in a house and they were beating us by belts. They have taken my daughter. I will not forget that. 
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How much important is it for you that the rest of the world knows what happened to you?
R: Too much.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: Do you want that new generations know that?
R: Yes, 4. We want everyone knows that.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: What is it important for you?
R: In order for them to know what we have been through. Hopefully, they will give some of our rights. 
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What shoud happen for new generations to know that? To be a history. Do you think through school lessons or what?
R: They can tell new generations in many ways. We become happy when people hear and come to us. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you heard about an organization, called truth?
R: No.
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: Truth organization invigates the crimes of past.
R: Genocide?
I: All crimes.
R: But I have only talked to genocide office. They have written our stories. Five days, I was going to the genocide office.
I: This organization is similar to that one and gets support from government.
R: Yes, they took our blood examines as well. 
I: What do you say about such organization for investigating ISIS crimes?
R: It is very good. We want that our genocide to be recognized. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What do you think should happen for the victims of ISIS?
R: We want to have them back. All of them, not only mine.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: Is there anything special for Yazidis to be done?
R: We have not seen anything yet.
I: Something to be done?
R: Nobody has done anything for us. Bringing us here was good but our people are in bad situation in Iraq.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: You will answer us on this paper. Do you feel that you are a victim?
R: How?
I: We mean that do the people see you as a victim? Like a victim who needs support?
R: Nobody has done anything for us. She doess not understand the question
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why not?
R: I do not know. When we escaped through Syria, we did not have clothes to wear. Nobody helped us in Iraq as well. My son also passed away and nobody helped us in anything. 
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
I: Still I have some questions about the situation in Iraq.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think that there will be a lasting peace in Iraq?
R: It is difficult. 
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you think that there will be a lasting peace in middle ease?
R: It is difficult to see anything good in these years or Iraq gets better.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What should be done to have peace in Iraq?
R: Everybody knows that Iraq is destroyed. People want to return to their homes but their houses are destroyed. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: What do you say for those who fight ISIS?
R: We become so happey when we hear that they are fighting ISIS.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What should be done in Iraq for Yazidis and other minorities to be protected?
R: We want that their houses to be rebuilt because their situation in those camps is bad. To give their rights and there will be protection for them.
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
I: Now we want to know from you how important is it for you to speak about what you have seen?
R: To speak about?
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Our first question about that topic is how often have discueed you story?
R: Untill now?
I: Yes
R: To whom, do you mean?
I: To anybody since you came to Germany.
R: I only spoke to a German person. He was with Khalil Bozani. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Have you discussed wit your family, friends or to a psychiatrist about your story?
R: Yes, a psychiatrict sometime but not all of it. When Khalil Bozani came, I told them all of it. I spoke about my daughter and they said that someone might help me.
I: Do we write once a week or more that you are taking about your story?
R: Only once but I always talk to myself. I talk to psychiatrict as well.
I: Who is Khalil Bozani?
R: He is brother of Khairi Bozai. 
I: What is he doing or what is his position?
R: He is also in an organization which gives devices to disabled people.
I: Do you know what organization that Khalil works with?
R: I forgot its name. I have a picture of it. That organization takes staff for the camps. 
I: Never mind. 
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
I: Since you came to Germany, how many times have you written your story such as on Facebook, for a book purpose? 
R: I have not but only in Genocide office. 
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: How often do you listen to news about Iraq?
R: I always follow up on my mobile.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why?
R: I am worried about their situation in there. 
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: Where do you seek information, which website?
R: I do not have Facebook. I call my family for news.
I: Radio?
R: No, they have TVs. I call them to know the news. They are in Sinuni.
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: How do you communicate with aother Yazidi member about different issues?
R: I ask about situation.
I: On which line, whatsapp?
R: Yes, whatsapp.
I: Telephone?
R: On whatsapp.
I: Facebook?
R: No. I did not create a Facebook page because a lot of bad things happen on Facebook.
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: we have reached to the last part aand we will start to ask about what have you seen by yourself. 
R: About ISIS?
I: I am sorry as I will ask you some questions which might abset you but it is important to know that you can only talk about the things youwant to.
R: it is fine.
I: If you needed any rest, tell us.
R: If you do not get tired, I will not.
I: What do you want to tell us about your captivity with ISIS?
R: If you want, I can tell you everything as we have seen a lot under their hands.
I: Here you go.
R: From the first day?
I: Yes.
R: We were in the village. It was 11:30 pm o’clock. We were at home, sitting. Our neighbors told us that ISIS attacked us. They surrounded us from all locations. Our children were crying and we run. They told us to gather in a school. We went without taking our children’s food like their milk or clean water or nappies and they were young such as 6 months and so on. They put us in the school and they told us to go to the second floor of the school as well. We went there too and they told us to give them all of our gold or valuable things, otherwise they will undress us in there. We gave them our gold. By 5,000,000 million Iraqi dinnars, I bought my gold and gave them. They took all the gold and money. They said that they will take men. Through a window I saw many people, I told my friends that there are either Peshmerga coming or ISIS are killing men. They told me that it is not true. There was pool beside the school and they put many men in it and they ISIS were surrounding up of the pool. They started to shoot them from above. We knew that ISIS killed them but were convincing ourselves to say that it is not true. It was real. They killed those while we were in the school. They were shooting on air when they were taking other men in groups. They took three groups of men and took others. After men, they came to us and said that if anyone wants to convert to stand up but nobody stood up. They took us to Sulakh and we spent two nights there. At 6 o’clock, they put us in buses after they separate old women from us. They said that they will help those women and also they took some boys. They killed all of them. They came to us and took us to Talafar to three locations. Some locations were full of people. They put us in a school which had 1000 children and women and they put us among them. We remained there 13 days without food, water or anything. My three children, one who still in captivity and my twins were in a bad situation. They were giving us drugs and we were always falling asleep. There was some dirty water which we were drinking. My children were vomiting from that water. Everyone was like me in the school. I told ISIS that my children will die and they told me that they will be responsible. My son died on thie hands.  
I: How were they responsible for that?
R: I do not know but they said that if my children died, they will bring them for me. Later, they took us to Quzil Gir villages from the school. Guzil Gir village is beside Talafar. Our situation was bad there as were in an unfinished building. The weather was cold as it near October. We brought bricks and closed the doors. They were visiting us and giving us food itmes sometines. I used a friend’s mobile and called my brother. I told him to send a mobile for me if possible in order to keep touch with them and be able to escape. My brother gave a cellphone to a hsop keeper through a person. The shopkeeper informed the ISIS about that. They arrested me and took me to Talafar. They punished me a lot by beating for what asked about cellphone. I could not say that my cousin has a cellphone. Instead, I told them that I found a mobile on ground after their departure from our place. They brought my cousin though. They shot five bullets close to my feet. At one night, they came and said that our place is not good and they will bring our men for us in a nother place near Talafar. They took us that night and put us in a small room and we were 60 to 70 persons. At morning, they brought three buses and said that if they say, we should go. We wanted to take some clothes for our children but they did not let. They took us by those buses. We passed Shingal and we thought that we have gone. They took us to Syria through Tal-Izer town. The locations were full of people there as well. We went in buses from 9:00 am until 9:00 pm to reach Syria. They took us to an orchard in Raqa. They brought us dinner for us at night, some ate and some did not. Every morning, some people were coming to buy some of us for them. 15 of us were going to the first floor and some people were coming for buying us. They were choosing grils for them. Some of those sellers were disabled, sick and burned. We were not daring to look at them. During 40 days, they were buying us. We remained in the orchard in Raqa. We were about 1500 women and children in there. They told us to cook for ourselves. Then they took us to too many different locations. They sold us. Ameer, Mirna and I were together and they separated my daughter from me. 
I: Your son died?
R: Yes, he died in Talafar. A Jeeb took me with 8 others who were from our village. They put us under ground in 7 floors. The airplanes were strikng Raqa near to us. Children were crying and they were coming to us with a stick to say that if we raise voices, they will beat us. We stayed there 3 days without food and there is only dirty water. My kid was getting sick of that water when I was using for milk. Once at 7:00 pm, took 4 of us and left 4 with their children. They took us in a Jeeb. They took us at 7:00 pm from Raqa to reached Halab at 12:30 pm. They put us in a house with force. The house was dark and we found a woman from our village there. We felt happy when we saw her there. We sat down there. They told us to take shower but we refused. 
I: During that whole period, you did not take shower?
R: No, five months, we did not take shower. That woman used to live there and she was not scared and also she was preganant. She told us to take of her as it was her last month to give birth. Then, she gave birth. She has another son who was 3 years old and her daughter was at Mirna’s age. ISIS gave poisons to her children and three of them died. We were with her and later on ISIS brought our prevous 4 friends and thus we became 8. They all 8 of us to a mosque in Halab. It was night. There was like a lottery box, contained our names and 8 persons came int. Those 8 persons have been told by others to pull our names from the box for taking us. Then, each of them took each of us. They took us by force. They each of us to different location. There was a big school in Halab. The one who bought me put Mirna, Ameer and I in that school in a room. He locked the door on us and we stayed 5 days without food and water in that room. Then, at 7:00 am he came and told me that we will leave the school. We left it and we were on the way until 5:00 pm. He took us to a house at night and we were scared. We were all crying especially Mirna and Ameer. He was beating when we were saying something. It was winter and the weather was cold. We had no heaters but there was a small carpet. The house was abandoned. The situation was very bad and we stayed 3 months in there. He took me to Bota island or an island because it was flat. There was a village and we only were there with 15 ISIS headquarters. They were fighting with PKK and their mortars were falling close to us. My children were crying and also there were sounds of airplanes. 3 months we were at dark during nights because there are no lights because they were scaring from airplanes. I told then and I will kile myself because the situationa and it was only the villages in the area. We were with ISIS only. You all know that they have done a lot to us by force.There was no option for me to escape. I told the person who bought me that I cannot stay there. Then, he told that he will take to his friends’s house. We went there and there was a woman with her son and her children. I stayed a month with them. I told the woman to help me to escape but she told me that she will tell her son to inform the ISIS that I am trying to escape. A mullah came and told me that I am still in my religion. I was still wearing my home clothes. They told me if I do not exchange my clothes and convert to Islam, they will take my children away. The woman bought black clothes and even gloves and dressed me without my volition. They told me that I have to pray. I did because I was obliged and I was afraid. Then, he took me to another village to a family but that village was better because there were not a lot of ISIS. I mean not all of them were ISIS. Some of them were good. An ISIS headquarter was close to our house there as well. I remainded 2 months in that house. There was a very good woman neighbor in that village and her husband as well. ISIS member (who bought me told me) that there are some spies watching me and if I opened the door for escaping, they will kill me. Once he was not home. He went to headquarter. I opened the door and my neighbor was close and I called here to come. She came and I cried a lot in front of her. I told her if she is with ISIS. She said that she and her husband are not with ISIS but there were nowhere else to go to from the village. So we stayed in our house. I told her what happened to me. I told her everything as just I am telling you now. I told her if she has a cellphone. She said that she has a cellphone and asked if I have numbers of my relatives. I had my father’s number and the Adree’s number as well. I gave her number but then she said that she cannot dial them because the network was bad. Later on, I told the ISIS member that our neighbors are good. I told him that in order to let me to see them and be able to find a way for escaping. I wanted to see a way of escaping through my neighbors. I started to go to see them and they were giving me yogurt as they had sheep. I told them to help to escape. The woman said that her sister-in-law is close and she will tell her that in order to help me. I told her sister-in-law to help me. She said that whe will see what she can do. The ISIS member went out from home once and said that he will not come back until evening. At 11:00 am, I went out. That sister-in-law showed me a way to escape through. Mirna, Ameer and I started walking from 11:00 am after dressing black clothes. The situation was so bad and I wanted to take risk if it would cost my life. Before the escaping, that sister-in-law told me that she has sent her son ti show them the route. Her son was in front of me until the surrounding of the village and then returned home. I am afraid that I have bothered you because my story is too long.
I: No
R: While I was walking, I big vehicle came and the driver was speaking Kurdish. I told him to take us for the sake of the children because it was April and the weather was hot. Hardly, he took to the main road and left. I was walking untl 3:00 pm. The weather was hot and ISIS members were in the mosques because it was Friday. We did not take water with us because we were in hurry. We just wanted to get out from that hell. After walking until 3:30 pm, I raised my hand for a Kia. He was also speaking Kurdish.Both were Syrian Kurds. I begged him to take me to the village when that sister-in-law adviced to go to. I told him to take me for the sake of the children. 
I: He took you free?
R: Yes, free. I went to that village to three houses. No one of them kept me and all dismissed me. I went to another house. There was a woman with her daughter-in-law under trees. They were planting. I went there and cried. The woman came to me and in Kurdish told me that why I was crying. I told her everything and told her that I need their help. She was good and brought me water. Then, hid me in the house. She told me if someone has seen while I was coming. I told her “yes”. She said that she is afraid of some people go and tell ISIS about me. She told me that I am her daughter. She told me that her husband is at work and when he comes back, she will tell him to help me. If he did not, she will send me with a car to a village to Free Army (Jesh Al-hur) for help. He came back from work. She told me to tell her husband about that and he might help me. I came and told him that and cried in front of him in order to help me for escaping. He told me that his cousin’s house is in Turkey and he calls him now and if he accepts to receive me, he will take me immediately to him. He put me, Mirna and Ammer in a motorbicycle at 5:00 pm and took us. We were driving util 12:00 pm. He was taking us through dirty routes because ISIS member were at the main routes. Then, he told me that we are in a safe place. I became happy as if I was home after that. He took me to that house and the family was very good for us. I spent two nights at their house. They told me to take shower, eat and drink as I am in a safe place. I did not take a shower but I ate there. Then, they asked me if I have telephone numbers. I told them that I have but there was enough network. He (Head of the family) said that he will go to somewhere high for network to call her family. He came back and said that they network comes sometimes at evening and I can talk to my father then. He said that If the netwok did not come, he will take me to that high place for calling. Finally, I called my father and told him that I was freed and with a family. They agreed that the family takes me to Turkey to Ghazi Ayntab. They took me there and my father with someone else was in Ghazi Ayntab, waiting for me. My father told me what to give him (Head of that family), I told my father to give him something because they helped me a lot. 
I: They did not help you for money?
R: No, not for money but my father gave $10000 to him, just for his support. I became very happy when I saw my father. I did not believe that I would ever see my father. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: You have been in prison 9 months?
	R: 10 months. We have seen a lot of difficulties and therefore we say that we will never forget. 	
	I: Honestly, we have nothing to say about all of this because I am surprised about your strength. You are a strong woman.
	R: It was difficult but thanks God that we were freed. I want to get my daughter back. Men probably got killed for their religion. I think a lot about my daughter. 
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: How your experience under ISIS control has affected your health?
R: My health is not as before. 
I: What has been changed? What has appeared as a new thing?
R: Before, I was not thinking about such things. I think at night. 
I: What about diseases?
I: I have headache.  
I: would you say your pain is from 0 to 4.
R: 4.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now I will tell you some diseases and how strong they are.
R: Ok
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: You said that you are too sick. How strong is it?
R: 4.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: do not you feel your skin or you have paralysis or prickling.
R: Too much.
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you have moment problems?
R: when I walk, I feel warm, my legs get havey and my hands prickle. Now here hurts me and my artery gets blue sometimes. 
I: You mean too much?
R: Yes, too much.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you feel dizzy or get muscle spasms?
R: 4. Here in the back of my neck hurst me and I cannt turn my head sometimes. 
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Do you have problesm in your eys and ears?
R: My eyes and ears hurt me. 4.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel suffocation or shortness of breath?
R: Too much. 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Dizziness?
R: Little.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Heart complains.
R: Yes. 3. When someone calls, it beats fast because I think a lot about my daughter. 
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Do you have pains in belly or do you have diarrhea. 
R: No.
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I: Do you have any other symptoms?
R: I have shortness of breath. 
I: What do you think is the reason of these symptons?
R: ISIS.
I: How your memory makes those diseases to happen?
R: When I sleep at night, I see bad things and I feel shortness of breath. Before 5 days, when was dreaming about our escape to between Talafar and Mosul and a person told me that another genocide will come. Since then, I scare and think a lot. We think a lot about those in Iraq. We say that we are safe but they are not. 
I: You said that your memory and what happened to you, how strong is this with you?
R: Strong? 
I: Yes.
R: 4.
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: We will tell you some other reasons if they are behind your disease. 
R: Ok
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think that your shortness of breath and other diseases are physical?
R: I think that I do not physical diseases but I have psychological problems. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: Do you think that those diseases happened to you by a magiciaon?
R: No. 
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you think that this related to religion? Or It is God’s punishment for sins?
R: Yes, I say that. It might his judge.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How the tortures that you have experienced affect your relationship with others?
R: After I have seen that, I lost trust with others.
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: After what happened to you, does Yazidi community accepts you?
R: Yes, too much. Bab Shekh said that no one can tell us anything.  Bab Shekh is the highest religious leader of Yazidis. 
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: Do you feel that Yazidi community has excluded you from Yazidi religion?
R: No, they have not. 
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Has the torture that you have seen, changed your faith?
R: No, I will not forget my religion. It was not up to us what happened to us. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I: Do you think that what happened to you made your religion stronger?
R: 4.
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: How do you overcome daily what happened to you?
R: My days?
I: Yes.
R: In a hard manner.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: What do you do to live that this?
R: I am busy when I go to school and when I am with my children. When my children sleep at night, I think a lot, sometimes until 2 to 3 o’clock. 
I: What do you need to reduce your thinking?
R: If my daughter come back, my thinking will be reduced and changed. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: We will tell you several things and you will say how they benefit from 00 to 4.
R: Ok
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: How do you think your is strength is among Yazidis? Your faith?
R: 4
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe in your strength?
R: 4
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: Do you pray?
R: Too much. 4. 
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Retreat or want to be a lone.
R: Not too much. When I am alone, I think too much. When I talk to my sister, I fell comfortable. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Do you do something that avoids thinking about ISIS?
R: Whatever I do, does not  help me to forget that. I do not want to think about when they were arresting us and beating us but it is not up to me.
I: Zero?
R: Yes.
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Does benefit you talking to others?
R: 2.
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: When you talk to a therapist, do you get benefit?
R: No, never.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Does it benefit you when you bring support from Yazidi community?
R: Nobody has helped us yes. There are some people here and they even did say hi to us. We want them to come to us because we would be comfortable. Yazidi who are not in Faiford help each other. 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: We will tell you some other things and will see if you have done them. If you did them, how did they benefit you.
R: Ok
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you taken medication? Medication of therapy?
R: Once I had medication of therap.
I: How did it help? 
R: I did not hear her.
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: Psychologist?
R: They gave me medication. 
I: Did you talk to him?
R: He does not support me.
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Were you alone or you were two?
R: Two.
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
I: Did not in group help you?
R: No.
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Benefit from a magician or a religious leader?
R: No, I did not go anywhere.
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Have you had herbal medicine?
R: No. 
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Social worker or childcare?
R: They help us a lot. They are good and our interpreter as well. 
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Doctor?
R: No, they do not benefit me.
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Why you are not comfortable with doctors?
R: I become upset when I see them. Also, I do not want to have medication. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: The things that we have told, how do you think that they benefit you or make you feel comfortable?
R: I do not remember. I forget things. 
I: For example, doctor, therapist and social worker.
R: Social workers are good for us. They help us a lot. Doctors do benefit us.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: What kind of help do you need and has not provided for you yet?
R: I want help for those who are in the camps. Then, we will be comfortable. 
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Now we will tell you several things and you will say how strong they were before 7 days or within those 7 days.
 R: Ok
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: Any reminder brought me back to the previous feelings.
R: Vier. German number
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: I had problems of sleeping the whole night.
R: 2. When I saw that genocide will come, think a lot.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
	I: Other thigs when I see, remind me of ISIS.
	R: 4. Now when we go to the bazaar or station and see a beard person, all ISIS things come to my mind. 	
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you feel angry?
R: 4. Specially whem someone tell us if we are muslims or not. They ask that because of our traditional clothes that we are wearing for what happened to us. We are not muslims, we are Yazidis. Three Afghans told me if I am muslim or not. 
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: did not want to be angry when bad things come to my mind.
R: 4.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: I think about it when I did not mean to?
R: 3.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: I feel that happened to me was like a dream.
R: 4.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: I try to over come my thoughts?
R: I want to avoid them but I cannot.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: feel suffocated or startled 
R: 4.
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: My feelings became weaker.
R: For kids?
I: For everything. For what happened to you, your feelings became weaker.
R: I told at the beginning that it was this and now it is this. She gestures to something
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Sometimes, it happens to me as I was in the prison of ISIS.
R: 4.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Sometimes I feel that my feelings are strong about what happened to me but I do not want to busiy myself with.
R: 4. It is not up to us. That week when we went o Stoutkart when our relative got engaged to her cousin. They told me to go to the markets to get some staff. A car with three persons said that hello muslims muslims while they were driving. I felt upset and spit on them. They left rapidly.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: It is hard for you to get your mind functional, your memory. For example, sometimes you ask us what we have said rearlier.
R: 4.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: When it happens to me, I feel shortness of breath, feel dizzy and my heat beats fast.
R: 4. Now when you leave, I will not remember what you have said. I forget.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: I tried to not talk about this. About your story.
R: Too much.
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Since you came to Germany, what positives have you seen?
R: The positive things that I have seen are my children are going to school and to kindergarten (German word) and I also go to school for 2 to 3 hours. 
I: What else is positive?
R: When responsibles like you visit to us and talk to us, we become happy. When they tell us our rights like going to kindergarten (German word) and things like that. 
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: How do you see the project that brought you here?
R: It is goog.
I: How do you evaluate, from 0 to 4?
R: 4. Honestly, we are satisfied because it brought us here. Dr. Luma and Dr. Mirza brought it. They support us a lot. Also, Germans helped us a lot. We thank whoever helped. I might forget to say names.  
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: What are three positive things for you here?
R: My kids go to Kindergarten (German word). Mirna will go to school and I also go to school. When I am in school, I do not think too much but I forget things. Sometimes, the teachers tell me to read but I cannot. I feel that the teacher will be upset of that. I think of this sometimes. I said that the teacher might not know what happened to us. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: In this project, tell me what the three negative things are.
R: There is nothing negative. 
I: Anything?
R: The car that told me that. That one was bad. She means when three persons in a car said “Muslims, Muslims”. 
I: That has no relationship with the project. 
R: There is nothing bad. When someone tell us “You are Muslim”, I feel upset. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: what hope do you have for future?
R: Our future is connected to Germany.
I: Thank you.
R: I am grateful for you as well.