Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
Audio file name: [037]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself. C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim. C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you? C02 Tu çend salî yî? C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R: 26
C04 What is your marital status? C04 Tu zewiciyi yan na? C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?
R: No
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner? C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?” C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any? C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn? C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: With whom did you come here?
R: Me and 2 sisters of mine.
C07 Who are they? C07 Ew kî ne? C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)? C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language? C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn? C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Do you know how to read and write?
R: I am currently going to courses.
C10 What is your highest education level? C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Didn’t you go to school before?
R: No, I didn’t go in Iraq.
C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
I: How good are you at reading and writing? Can you do some?
R: A bit.
C12 Are you currently in school? C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)? C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Are you currently going to school?
R: Yes, I have been going for 45 days.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future? C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî, tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê? C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed? C14 Tu nahe kar diki? C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you working at a job here?
R: No, I am still going to school. I don’t know the language yet, so I cannot work.
C15 If yes, what is your current work? C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî? C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment? C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki? C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
C18 If not, why not? C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki? C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home? C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir? C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Were you working in Iraq?
R: No, only gardening works sometimes.
C20 If yes, what was your work? C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir? C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any? C22 dine te chiya? C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R: I am a Yazidi.
C23 Please specify your religion C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group? C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî? C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: Which nation are you from? Kurdish, Arabic, or Yazidi?
R: I am a Yazidi.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye? C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS Pêşik û Şertên niha Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today? D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye? D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What do you think about, worry about in your life currently?
R: My life is so difficult.
I: What do you constantly think about? What’s it that you want to do the most?
R: To learn the language, to be able to take care of ourselves.
I: What else?
R: I wish they allow those in Iraq to come here. Because their living conditions are too difficult there. It’s getting worse day by day. I wish they were allowed, as well.
I: Here, there are so many people who want to help you. What can be done, what is needed here for these people to help you? But they cannot do anything, they can only make your voice heard.
R: I know
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life? D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe? D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need to maintain your life?
R: I’d like to be able to stay here, learn the language, and work at a job. I have 2 younger sisters. I’d like to have them with me, and I’d like to be able to take good care of them. I can start a new life in this way.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now? D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye? D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Do you understand Arabic?
R: No
I: How strong are you as a person?
R: I am very strong.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you? D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye? D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What is in your future? What is waiting for you?
R: I think my future will be goodin here, but for now, we are not really enjoying it.
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live? D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî? D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation improves in Iraq, if peace is ensured, would you like to return there? This is only an assumption, okay? Would you return there, would you stay in Germany, or would you like to go to Kurdistan?
R: No, I’ll stay here. I’m afraid to go back.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location? D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir? D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany? D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe? D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel Germany as your homeland?
R: Yes, what Germany has done for us, no one else did. Yes, it’s not easy for us, but they present us many opportunities. It’d be so good if we can learn the language at school, and work.
I: If you grade it between 0 and 4, how much do you feel Germany as your homeland?
R: Half.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years? D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû? D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: Since you came to Germany, how good has your experience been here?
R: Good, 3.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way? D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin? D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why good?
R: I am aware of that everyone can maintain their lives in here. Here, I’m going to school, here I have no fear, and people don’t interfere here whatever I do.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe? D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye? D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: Let’s talk about this assumption. Let’s say you might go back to Iraq, or Kurdistan. What needs to happen there for this, for you to be able to go back without fear?
R: No, I’m not afraid. Excuse me, I cannot understand your language much.
I: Yes, you’re right, it’s not quite like your language.
R: Yes, it’s not like mine.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic. E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you? E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be? E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: What is justice for you? The meaning of the word “justice” is, a situation that someone cannot get away with it, when they act unfairly against you.
R: We wish that one day either we or someone else will make them pay for what they did to us. Because, we didn’t harm anyone. They harmed us.
I: Anything else you’d like to add? If you feel uncomfortable or you don’t want to answer, you can say that to us, okay?
R: You already know about what we’ve been through and why we are here, it’s okay.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS? E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e? E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How can you paid back for what ISIS did to you? How can your rights be given back to you?
R: I should make them go through what they made me go through. They killed our people, so we should kill them too. They took us as captives, and we should do the same. They beat us, we should beat them. They took our little girls, we should make them suffer the same.
I: How important is it for you to have justice served, graded from 0 to 4?
R: Ah…
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice? E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in? E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: Do you have hope that you’ll get your rights back in this aspect?
R: Yes, until the end of the world.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions? E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete? E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it that justice is served for those people who made you go through those bad things?
R: It’s very important.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way? E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da? E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Why is it that important?
R: Why? They attacked us, although we hadn’t made them any harm. Nobody mentions the name of Yazidis in bad ways, everyone is pleased with us. But we don’t understand what they want from us, Yazidis, and our religion.
I: Is there anything else you’d like to add?
E06 Who should be held accountable? E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye? E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
E07 And how should they be held accountable? E07 çawa? E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: How should they pay for what they did to you?
R: We should take them as captives, as they did to us. We should make them suffer even more than we had to suffer. Because they attacked us without a reason, but now we have reasons to do them harm. We’d be even if we do them the same.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike? E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: You know about courts. Have you heard about any courts that judge ISIS? Do you think it’s sufficient?
R: No, more is needed. They say they’re going to do something about it, but nobody does anything.
E09 If yes, which ones? E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in? E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
I: Who, for example?
R: Nadia Murad, Faride Abbas, they talk to governments, but nothing is done. A lot of people have met them and talked to them, but it’s no use.
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence? E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin? E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is it possible that you forgive ISIS?
R: Never
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive? E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki? E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: Is there any way for you to forgive?
R: No matter what they do, they’ll not be forgiven.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic. E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it that you know information about what is going on in Iraq and ISIS? Do you want to know them, or you don’t?
R: I’d like to know, but I don’t.
I: Is it very important for you to know?
R: Yes
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: Is it important that other peoples know about it?
R: Yes, the whole world should know.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that your children and grandchildren in the future know about what you’ve been through?
R: It’s very important, they should always know what we’ve lived.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened? E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu? E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why is it important is it for you that the people know?
R: Maybe someone will hear about it and help us.
I: Anything else?
R: No.
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened? E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu? E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: Through which means can they hear about it and know?
R: Everyone talks about it in some ways, on TV channels, on talks.
I: How will the children of your children know?
R: I’ll tell it to my children and they’ll pass it on to theirs.
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission? E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)? E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you heard about the justice commission, the truth commission?
R: No. Honestly, I haven’t heard much since I left Iraq.
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes? E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre? E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: It’s a commission founded by the state. They are sending them to collect information on what ISIS did, and they get results. Do you think it’s sufficient?
R: More should be done.
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS? E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish? E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What can be done for the victims of ISIS, for those who suffer from ISIS?
R: We’d be pleased with anything that’s done for us.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis? E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe? E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: What can be done for Yazidis?
R: It’d be good to have genocide courts.
I: For the murdered ones?
R: No, if these courts are founded, something can be done for Yazidis.
I: What is the name of the court you mentioned?
R: Genocide
I: Do they exist in Iraq?
R: Yes
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim? E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen? E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Do you see yourself as a victim of ISIS?
R: Yes
I: Why do you feel that way?
R: Because they took me as a captive, took my mother and father away from us, took my brother, tortured us and did all kinds of harm to us.
I: Do the people around you realize that you are a victim when they look at you?
R: Yes
I: Too much?
R: Yes, they know.
E23 Why do you feel that way? E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin? E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE Aşitî Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions. F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim. F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq? F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)? F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think peace can be ensured in Iraq?
R: It’s very difficult.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries? F02 Û li fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her welêtiki?” F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: What about Arabic countries?
R: I don’t think I know.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? F03 Ji bo aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe? F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What is required to ensure peace in Iraq?
R: If only Iraq was cleansed of ISIS. Then we’d know that Iraq is good.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS? F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe? F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Is it a good thing that soldiers are fighting to force ISIS out?
R: Yes, but I don’t think they can force ISIS out.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq? F05 Û ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe? F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What is needed in Iraq to protect Yazidis and other peoples?
R: Something should be done for Êzîdxan. Yazidis should have their own forces.
I: What is Êzîdxan?
R: Êzîdxan Government
I: Is it in Iraq?
R: Yes
I: In Sinjar?
R: Yes
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through. G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
I: Now we have a couple more questions about your captivity under ISIS.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS? G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)? G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, for 2 years, how many times have you talked about your experiences?
R: I don’t talk much.
I: Don’t you ever talk about your experiences?
R: I first talked to provide information.
I: Where was that?
R: In Kurdistan.
I: Haven’t you talked here?
R: No. They want me to talk, but I don’t want to.
I: Have you seen a psychologist?
R: No, I didn’t go.
I: With whom did you talk about your experiences? Was it the police, or a lawyer?
R: Police.
I: Do you talk to your family and friends about your experiences, or no?
R: No.
I: Have you ever talked on the TV, radio, Facebook or somewhere else?
R: No. Once, a friend of mine who broke free with me went to USA. An American woman came to me in Kurdistan, and gave me information about my friend. And I replied her questions.
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you? G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)? G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you? G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin) G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to. G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin) G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper? G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû, (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu? G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER Heger parêzer be Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer? G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû? G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them? G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we yan hûn chun jem ? G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer? G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ? G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them? G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt? G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE [Heger shirteye) Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them? G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ? G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
I: When you spoke to the police, did they come to you, or did you go to them?
R: They wanted us to go to them, and we did.
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police? G12 hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete te bi shertede deyi ? G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
I: After you gave them information, do you know what they do with the information you give?
R: They wanted that information to be able to get our rights back one day.
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them? G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt? G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Have you talked to the police once more?
R: No, it was only one time.
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book? G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî? G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Have you written about your experiences?
R: No, I haven’t.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you? G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin? G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written. G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)? G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS? G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin? G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany, how many times have you received information about what’s going on in Iraq and ISIS? Do you want to know what’s going on in Iraq?
R: Yes, I’d like to know.
I: Do you receive information every day?
R: No, I don’t have any information, but I’d like to know. I mean I want to know about it, when something happens.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)? G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)? G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you want to know?
R: No, I don’t know anything.
G20 Where do you seek information? G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin? G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: When you want to know, where can you get information? Family, friends, or via Facebook?
R: I get information from what I see on Facebook.
G21 If other, please specify G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one? G22 hûn û malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: When you want to talk to Yazidis from your own people, how do you reach them? Do you ask your family or friends?
R: Yes
I: Do you use WhatsApp?
R: Yes, I use WhatsApp and Facebook.
I: Do you talk on the phone?
R: Yes
G23 If other, please specify G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA TRAÛMA TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question. H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri) H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS? VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin? VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: We are coming to the last part, and there are around 90 questions here. They’ll be about your health, experience, and psychology. If there’re any questions you don’t want to answer, you don’t have to. You can answer if you feel like it, but you don’t have to talk.
R: I’ll try to help as much as I can.
I: We want to know how you fell a captive to ISIS. But don’t talk if you don’t want to.
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity? VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man? VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: How long did you stay with them?
R: 4 months and 15 days.
I: Which village are you from?
R: Tel Qasap.
I: Where did they take you?
R: (incomprehensible)
I: And then?
R: Then they took us to Mosul, and from Mosul to Telafer, and then to Syria. 9 days in Raqqa, around 23 days in Aleppo, and 5 days in Manbij.
I: And then?
R: Then I got rescued.
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape? VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin? VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: Did anyone buy you, or did you run to your escape?
R: I both paid for it and ran away to escape. Someone gave money for me, to take me away from them to Kurdistan.
I: As a fugitive?
R: Yes
I: Where did you pass as a fugitive?
R: To Syria.
I: Did they come and take you from Manbij.
R: Yes
I: Who paid for it?
R: I don’t know who paid for it for the first time, but in the next one, it was Nechirvan.
I: So, Kurdistan paid for it?
R: Yes
I: When you went to Kurdistan, where did you go?
R: Xanike.
I: Close to Dohuk?
R: Yes, when I broke free from ISIS, my father was in Xanike.
I: Where was your mother?
R: She was still in the hands of ISIS. I returned with my sisters. All our family, apart from my father were in the hands of ISIS. After we came back, my grandmother, and then my mother came as well.
I: So, there weren’t any captives left?
R: Still there were captives. 2 sisters, 2 brothers of mine, my aunt-in-law and my nephew, 6 people in total.
I: Has your father never been a captive?
R: No, he hasn’t.
I: Is your family in Dohuk right now?
R: My mother and my father are there.
I: Both of your sisters are here?
R: Yes
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being? H01 chiqes pisbune daishe ( ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend? H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: How has your bad experience affect your health?
R: When I think about it, I feel like killing myself.
I: Is your health better or worse here?
R: It’s fine. I’m trying to forget. I know I’ll never forget, but I need to make an effort, at least.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being? H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê chu saxbuna we bedilend? H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: How much has your bad experience affect your health? Can you grade it from 0 to 4? How is your health currently?
R: 2.
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced? H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine? H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now you’ll grade my questions from 0 to 4.
H04 Pain H04 Êş (eshek) H04 Schmerz
I: Do you have any sickness?
R: No, I don’t have any sickness currently.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause) H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties) H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi) H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you have trouble walking?
R: No
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling) H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be herzin/dejerfen H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder) H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Are your eyes, ears, mouth, nose fine? Do you have any problems with them?
R: No, nothing.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel short of breath?
R: Yes, sometimes.
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance) H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte wekî dinya li dora we digere H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you feel dizzy?
R: Yes, it happens sometimes when I think.
I: Can you grade it?
R: 4.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats) H11 dle ta deshe H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Do you have any pain in your heart?
R: No
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea) H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Your stomach, abdomen?
R: No, I only went to the hospital for my teeth since I came to Germany.
I: Is there anything else, apart from what I asked?
R: No.
H13 Do you have any other symptoms? H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)? H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group Group 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned? H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn? H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine? H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any? H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye? H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health? H18 Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin? H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health: H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir? H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence) H20 Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel) H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Has your bad experience change your temperament?
R: Yes, very much.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction) H21 lashe ta, misal (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think your pains and troubles are because of the affects of ISIS?
R: Yes, I was always thinking about my sisters when I was a captive, and it hurt a lot, it bothered me a lot.
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms) H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi) H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins) H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you believe this comes from God?
R: Yes, nothing takes place without the consent of my God almighty.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people? H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye navbera we u milete kiri? H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How has your experience affect your relationship with people? Your relations with your friends are better now?
R: No, I can’t meet new friends much.
I: Were you like that before as well?
R: No, I wasn’t. I had friends. Now, I don’t feel like going out, meeting new friends.
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community? H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye? H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: How has your captivity under ISIS and your experience affect your relationship with Yazidis? Has you closeness to Yazidis changed, or is it same as it was before?
R: No, it hasn’t changed. It’s as it used to be.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion? H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî? H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: Do you feel that you are growing distant from the Yazidi community, or is it the same?
R: I feel the same with Yazidis.
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith? H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we? H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Did ISIS affect your religious faith, your faith to God?
R: I am still a Yazidi. I never left my religion. The more they forced me to convert, the more I connected with my faith.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith? H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari) we ji bo diyanet yizidi? H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence? H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî? H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: What do you do to forget or comfort yourself?
R: I don’t think I can ever forget.
I: Some people draw or paint, some people work…
R: Yes, I see. There are some who even got married and had children. But I won’t forget it as long as I am alive.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief? H30 çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)? H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: Do you use medication, for your feeling of suffocation for example?
R: No
I: You just wait until it’s over?
R: Yes.
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence? H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê : H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now I’ll ask you to give grades for my questions.
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family) H32 te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet) H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Does it help you to have your own people with you, to support you?
R: Yes, 4.
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength) H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî) H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe in yourself?
R: Yes, I do. 
H34 Praying H34 limê kirin H34 Beten
I: Do you pray?
R: Yes.
I: Does it help you? Can you grade it?
R: Very much.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone) H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Do you like spending time alone?
R: No, it’s difficult being lonely.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS) H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we) H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Is there anything that remind you of ISIS?
R: Yes
I: Do you try to stay away from them?
R: Yes
I: Does it make you feel better if you can stay away from them?
R: Yes, but I don’t feel like I can ever stay away.
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you, or don’t you want to talk about your experience?
R: It’s hard. When you have bad experiences you don’t want to think about them. Constantly thinking and talking about it would drive a person crazy.
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists) H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst) H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Do you want to see a psychologist?
R: No
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39 alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Do you feel better, does it help when Yazidis help you, take care of you?
R: Yes
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope? H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe. H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you do anything else to forget?
R: I don’t.
Group Group 
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being. H45 Niha ezê navê reya bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood) H46 îlaç (derman) H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you used sleeping pills or similar medication?
R: No
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi) H47 Psychologen
I: Have you talked to a psychologist?
R: No.
H48 Individual psychotherapy H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Have you seen a psychologist either alone, or as a group?
R: No, I have never went to a psychologist.
H49 Group psychotherapy H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari) H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Yazidis have a sheikh father. Have you visited him?
R: Yes, when we were resuced from the hands of ISIS we all went there, to Lalesh.
I: Did it make you feel better?
R: Yes, of course. Seeing that captivated Yazidis returned even more faithful made him happy too.
H51 Herbal medicine H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati) H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Have you used herbal medicine?
R: No, since I came to Germany I only took menstruation medication for 3 months.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare) H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan) H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: The attendants here, do they help you?
R: Yes, they help me a lot. I can never forget their kindness. Me and my 2 sisters, we are here together and they gave us a room. When I asked for 2 rooms, they said no. But they were the ones before. Now the new ones are so nice.
I: The previous ones, were they not nice?
R: No, they were also nice, but they didn’t do this. I felt heart broken when they refused. 
H53 Doctor or physician H53 toxter? H53 Ärzte
I: Are you going to a doctor?
R: No, I didn’t feel the need. But my sister does.
I: You said the woman here is good, right?
R: Yes, yes, very good. I’d grade her as 4.
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help? H54 Toxter: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: The doctor, the woman here, Sheikh Father, etc. How did they help you? For example the woman here takes care of your and your sisters’ needs, doesn’t she?
R: Yes, I like her much better.
H55 If medication: how much did it help? H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help? H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help? H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help? H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help? H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How did you feel when you went to Lalesh, to Sheikh Father?
R: He was very pleased and he forgave me. He said that I am halal like before and he said that he’s so happy that I returned.
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help? H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help? H61 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike? H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: If you go to a psychologist and talk, do you think you’d feel worse?
R: Yes. They told me here that I can go if I feel the need, but I didn’t want to go.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet? H64 Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye? H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Is there anything you need? Anything else than the doctor and the workers here, that you might need?
R: We wanted a house, but they told us that they can’t do that. They do everything else, whatever we want.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Now we have a list about things people feel after bad experiences. Now I’ll ask you and you’ll rely according to the results of your bad experience with ISIS.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: Is there anything that you make you remember?
R: No, I remember myself.
I: Do you remember too much?
R: Yes.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu) H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble sleeping? Do you wake up from your sleep feeling startled?
R: Yes, many nights I see them in my dreams.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Is there anything that makes you remember them, that makes you think about them?
R: I don’t understand.
I: Anything that makes you think of them, even though you don’t want to think
R: Ah yes, I see. I don’t want to think about them.
H69 I felt irritable and angry H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you think you became angrier since that times?
R: Yes
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist. H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Do you make any effort to not feel rage?
R: Yes. I feel peaceful when I’m not thinking about them. I become angry when I think about them. This is the reason behing my rage. 
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Do they sometimes come to your mind, although you don’t want to?
R: Yes
I: How often?
R: 3.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Do you think what you lived through was not real, but a dream?
R: Yes, it happens.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist. H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Are you trying to stay away from things that would remind you of what ISIS did to you?
R: Yes
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind H74 suret e ten sari ta H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do you have mental pictures in front of your eyes when you are thinking?
R: Yes, when I’m talking about it, I visualize them, it’s like TV.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Are you startled, how much?
R: Yes, 2.
H76 I tried not to think about it H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim. H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try not to think about it? How much?
R: Yes.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie. H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: We feel scared when we think of bad things, do you want to be distant from that feeling, not think about it when they come to your mind?
R: Yes
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder) H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Do you feel unmb when you think of bad things? How often does that happen?
R: (incomprehensible)
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir. H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Do you feel as if you were there, when they come to your mind?
R: 4.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir. H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble sleeping? Like tossing and turning in bed, without sleep?
R: Yes, it happens. Half. 2 I mean.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: When we think a lot, we feel like water waves. Have you ever felt that way?
R: You mean like instant sweating and feeling cold in a moment?
I: Yes, how much do you have that?
R: 2.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim. H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Are you trying to take it off your mind?
R: No, I don’t want to forget. I shouldn’t forget, because I want to settle accounts if we cross paths ever again. 
H83 I had trouble concentrating H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir. H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you sometimes feel as if your mind is somewhere else?
R: You mean it’s like when somebody talks to me, but I can’t listen? Yes, I have that.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: Do you have palpitations or anything else when you are thinking?
R: Yes, I feel suffocated when I am thinking.
H85 I had dreams about it H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît. H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you have dreams, nightmares?
R: Yes, sometimes.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir. H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel jaded, unhappy, or demoralized?
R: Yes, 4.
H87 I tried not to talk about it H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim. H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: How much you don’t like talking about your experience?
R: (incomprehensible)
H88 Thank you for these responses. H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany? H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne? H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: What’s the best thing you’ve experienced since you came to Germany?
R: The school makes me feel so much better. It’s nice in here, we don’t feel scared. People don’t intervene whatever we do.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time? H90 tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu? H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: You are a part of this project that brought Yazidis from Iraq. How pleased are you with this project?
R: Very much.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion? H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota? H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Why are you pleased?
R: There was nothing to protect us in Iraq. Here we are all able to maintain our own lives.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion? H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota? H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Is there anything in the project that you are not pleased with?
R: It’s just the housing situation that I’m not pleased with. Other than that, everything is fine. Also, I’d like it if another project was conducted to bring the remaining Yazidis here too.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future? H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)? H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: What gives you hope in life?
R: Everyone needs a purpose and hope, otherwise we cannot continue living.
I: What’s your hope? What’s its source?
R: It comes from God
I: Our questions are over, thank you for your responses. Thank you for your time.
R: I thank you. Pardon me if I had a shortcoming. You are working hard for this. Thank you.