Instructions for using this template
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English.
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words:Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue textdirectly after the response.
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
Audio file name: [046]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself. C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim. C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you? C02 Tu çend salî yî? C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R: Eighteen.
C04 What is your marital status? C04 Tu zewiciyi yan na? C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married or single?
R: I am single.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner? C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?” C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any? C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn? C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: How many people from your family were rescued and came here with you? How many people are your with in your family?
R: We are five people.
C07 Who are they? C07 Ew kî ne? C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
I: Five? Your mother, and sisters?
R: Me, my mother, two brothers and my sister.
I: In total, you are five.
R: Yes.
C08 Please specify who lives with you C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)? C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language? C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn? C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Do you know how to read and write?
R: Yes.
I: In which language?
R: In Arabic, Kurdish, and German
C10 What is your highest education level? C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Until which grade have you studied in Iraq?
R: 1st grade.
I: You mean 1st grade of middle school? 7th grade?
R: Yes.
C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school? C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)? C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: Are you currently going to school?
R: Yes.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future? C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî, tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê? C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed? C14 Tu nahe kar diki? C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you working at a job?
R: No.
C15 If yes, what is your current work? C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî? C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment? C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki? C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Would you like to have a job after finishing school?
R: Yes.
C18 If not, why not? C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki? C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home? C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir? C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before ISIS entered into Iraq, were you working at a job there?
R: No, I was only going to school.
C20 If yes, what was your work? C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir? C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any? C22 dine te chiya? C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religious faith?
R: Yazidism
C23 Please specify your religion C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group? C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî? C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: Which nation are you from?
R: Sorry?
I: Are you Kurdish, Arabic, or Yazidi?
R: I am a Yazidi.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye? C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS Pêşik û Şertên niha Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today? D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye? D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What do you think about the most in your life?
R: I think about my uncle who is in the hands of ISIS.
I: You think about your uncle?
R: Yes.
I: Can you tell me, apart from your uncle what gives you concerns, worries?
R: My sisters in Iraq.
I: You want them to be brought here with you?
R: Yes
I: How many sisters do you have there?
R: Two
I: Two.
R: I also want my father to be brought.
I: Is your father in the hands of ISIS?
R: No.
I: And your uncle?
R: Yes, my uncle is in the hands of ISIS. Two of my uncles are in Germany, one of my uncles is in the hands of ISIS.
I: You said two sisters, or three?
R: Two.
I: You have two sisters who are in Iraq?
R: Yes
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life? D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe? D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need to rebuild your life? How would you define it?
R: My life would be nice if my father and my sisters were saved from ISIS and brought here.
I: Then you can start a new life?
R: Yes.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now? D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye? D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Now I’ll ask you some questions and you can rate them from 0 to 4. Zero is the lowest, and four is the highest rate. From 0 to 4, how strong are you as a person? Can you state from 0 to 4, how stong do you feel?
R: Three.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you? D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye? D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: Do you think about your future?
R: Yes
I: What do you think about your future? What would be good?
R: So many things.
I: What, for example?
R: I can’t tell them in Kurdish.
I: In which language can you tell? In which language would you like to speak?
R: Kurdish.
I: Okay, but you can speak in another language too, I can understand.
R: I think of good things about my future. I wish we have a nice house, and we get reunited as a family again. It’d be so good for us.
I: So, you imagine a future with your family, living together here?
R: Yes, like to old times.
I: I see, you want it to be just like it used to be.
R: Yes.
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live? D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî? D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation in Iraq improves, would you like to go back to Iraq, or stay in Germany, or return to Kurdistan, or go to another country?
R: Germany is so good for us. I’d like to stay here, especially if other members of my family also come here. Iraq is not nice anymore. We don’t have anything left there. Also, ISIS is still there. Germany is much better for us. And being together, a reunion is even much better. Germany has helped us a lot.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location? D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir? D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany? D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe? D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel Germany as your own country? How much, from 0 to 4?
R: Of course, Iraq and Germany are not the same. No matter what, we were born and raised in there.
I: Betwoon 0 and 4, how much do you feel?
R: Three.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years? D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû? D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: How good has your experience been in Germany since you came here? Again, you can count from 0 to 4. How good has Germany been to you?
R: It’s been very good.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way? D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin? D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why has it been good?
R: In Germany we don’t feel fear. Iraq is full of fear, ISIS is there, Arabs are there.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe? D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye? D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: What needs to happen in Iraq so you’d want to go back, you could go back?
R: I don’t think that can happen after this time.
I: You don’t believe that?
R: No, I don’t. Iraq is not nice anymore.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic. E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you? E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be? E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: Do you know what justice means? It means giving your rights back to you. What does justice mean to you?
R: (Answers in German)
I: (In German)
(Conversation in German)
(Conversation in Arabic)
R: Should I speak in Arabic, or in Kurdish?
I: Whichever you wish.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS? E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e? E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How much do you want your rights to be given back to you?
R: Very much.
I: Four?
R: Yes.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice? E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in? E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: Do you have hope that you’ll be given back your rights?
R: We always have hope, thanks to God.
I: How much from zero to four?
R: Four.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions? E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete? E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it for you that ISIS is punished?
R: I wish they will be worse than they made us.
I: You want them to find worse than what they did to you?
R: Yes.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way? E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da? E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable? E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye? E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: When we look at ISIS, there are governors, commanders, their wives, and children. Their children are also ISIS. What do you think about their punishment? Should some be punished less than the other, or all the same? I mean, do you think their punishment should be one, or some should be punished more than the others?
R: Not even a single one of them should survive. What they did to us, there should be no survivors among them either.
I: None of them should survive?
R: Yes.
E07 And how should they be held accountable? E07 çawa? E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: What do you think their punishment should be?
R: It should be the most severe punishment.
I: What is it?
R: They should be left without food and water, and then they should be beaten to death. That should be their punishment.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike? E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: (Speaking in Arabic)
R: There are some.
I: Who? Have you heard of anyone who defend Yazidis’ rights, and make their voice heard?
R: I’ve seen it in Germany. Germany took Yazidis in and supported them. 
E09 If yes, which ones? E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in? E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence? E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin? E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is it possible for you to forgive ISIS?
R: No, not until I die.
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive? E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki? E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: If they beg for your forgiveness and say that they’ll do whatever you say, you’d still never forgive?
R: No, I won’t. I will never forgive, no way.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic. E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
I: Now I’ll ask you and you can reply in numbers.
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you to get news from Iraq, about what has happened, what is going on?
R: It’s very important for me, because my family is there. Of course it’s important for me to get news from them, about what’s happening in Iraq.
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it for you that all the people kno about what ISIS brought onto you?
R: It’s very important that people know what ISIS did to us.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that one day your children and grandchildren know about what happened in Iraq?
R: Of course we’ll tell them. We’ll tell what happened to us.
I: So, is it important for you that even your grandchildren know?
R: Yes, very much.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened? E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu? E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why is it important for you that everyone, your children, and your grandchildren know about it?
R: They need to know. So that what happened to us will not be forgotten, and they will be able to claim their rights. They should know what Arabs and ISIS did to us.
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened? E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu? E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What should be done? You say that you’ll tell it to your children, and they’ll tell it to theirs, and they’ll know in this way?
R: Yes. They need to know what happened to us, so they can claim what’s rightfully theirs.
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission? E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)? E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes? E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre? E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: (Speaks Arabic) They prepare reports on what ISIS did to you, do you think they are enough?
R: No, they’re not enough. They should be worse.
(Conversation in Arabic)
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS? E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish? E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What needs to be done for those who escaped ISIS?
R: For Yazidis?
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis? E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe? E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: Not only for Yazidis, but continue, answer it for Yazidis, what should be done?
R: They need a lot of help. Some of them are left without their mothers and father, they are killed, so they are left alone. In some families there’s no man left. I think they should be helped greatly.
I: When you say help, what can be done? What should be done for those people?
R: They should be helped.
I: Like what, for example?
R: Some families have no men, no one to work, they should be greatly helped. Some women are alone, they cannot sustain themselves, they cannot work. They should be helped. 
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim? E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen? E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: When people look at you from the outside, do they understand that you were kept by ISIS, and you got resuced?
R: I don’t think they know.
I: No, no. Do you feel that they understand you escaped from ISIS when they look at you?
R: I don’t know.
I: Is it normal?
R: Yes, they act normal to me.
E23 Why do you feel that way? E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin? E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: How don’t they understand? Do you think it’s because you are a strong person and you don’t reveal your bad experiences?
R: Yes, I experience it all inside me.
PEACE Aşitî Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions. F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim. F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq? F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)? F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think there will be peace in Iraq?
R: I don’t know.
I: Do you believe that? Or you don’t?
R: I think I don’t believe that.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries? F02 Û li fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her welêtiki?” F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you think there will be peace in Arabic countries? Like Iraq, Syria, etc…
R: Honestly, they are all Arabs…
I: You don’t believe that.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? F03 Ji bo aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe? F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: What do you think should happen in Iraq to have peace?
R: If Iraq improves…
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS? F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe? F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Now there are areas liberated from ISIS. Do you hear about them, or aren’t you interested much?
R: I was in Iraq, and there was a lot of war for a whole month.
I: Yes, I know. But you are in Germany now. Do you hear about areas liberated from ISIS?
R: No.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq? F05 Û ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe? F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: How do you think Yazidis can be protected, safeguarded?
R: Yazidis?
I: Yes
R: They should be taken under security, and they should have a nice place, without fear. They should be kept away from this atmosphere of terror. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through. G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS? G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)? G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, how much do you talk about your experiences in Iraq? Do you talk to your family or someone else about what you’ve been through in the hands of ISIS? How often do you talk? Once a month? Every day?
R: I don’t want to talk, I can’t talk anyway.
I: Don’t you ever talk?
R: If I have a friend whom I trust, and if I have trust in them, then we talk.
I: I see. How many times in a week? Or once a month?
R: Once in a month.
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you? G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)? G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you? G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin) G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to. G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin) G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Do you talk to your friends, your family?
R: Yes, I do.
I: Have you ever been to a psychologist?
R: No, I haven’t.
I: Did you talk to social services about your bad experience?
R: No, I haven’t talked.
I: Only your friends and family?
R: Yes
I: Have you ever written about them?
R: No, I haven’t written.
G05 If other, please specify G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper? G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû, (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu? G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER Heger parêzer be Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer? G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû? G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them? G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we yan hûn chun jem ? G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer? G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ? G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them? G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt? G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE [Heger shirteye) Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them? G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ? G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police? G12 hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete te bi shertede deyi ? G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them? G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt? G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book? G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî? G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you? G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin? G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written. G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)? G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS? G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin? G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany, do you follow the news?
R: I follow them on Facebook.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)? G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)? G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you follow them?
R: Because I want to know. After all they did to us, I want to see what happens to them.
I: So you want to know what happens to ISIS, whether they are dead or alive?
R: Yes.
G20 Where do you seek information? G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin? G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: Do you ask your friends and family about what’s happening in Iraq?
R: Yes, I ask.
I: There are no Iraqi radio or TV in Germany. But do you follow the news?
R: No, not in Germany.
G21 If other, please specify G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one? G22 hûn û malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: You and your Yazidi friends, are you informed about each other? Do you talk to each other? I’ll ask you, and you can reply as yes or no. For example, do you ask your friends and family about what they did and what happened?
R: Yes, I ask.
I: Do you talk on WhatsApp?
R: Yes
I: On the phone?
R: Yes
I: Do you communicate via Facebook?
R: Yes, we do.
G23 If other, please specify G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA TRAÛMA TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question. H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri) H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS? VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin? VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: Now, we came to the last part of this interview with you. If there are any questions you don’t want to answer, you can say so. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity? VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man? VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: How long did you stay in their hands, after you fell captive under ISIS?
R: Nine months.
I: Which village did you come from?
R: Hayy al-qadr.
I: Hayy al-qadr? Was it around Tel Afer?
R: Yes.
I: Were you there when ISIS entered into Tel Afer?
R: I am originally from Herdan village in Sinjar. When we escaped, we escaped from Tel Afer.
I: What was the nae of your village?
R: Herdan.
I: So, you escaped from Herdan to Hayy al-qadr?
R: When ISIS first came, we were in Herdan. We left Herdan around 4-5, and went to Sinun, as they invaded Herdan. But ISIS was also in Sinun and didn’t let us go to Kurdistan.
I: You escaped from Herdan to Sinun?
R: Yes, we went to Sinun.
I: But they were already there when you went there?
R: Yes, we went there and ISIS was there. They didn’t let us go to Kurdistan.
I: They didn’t let you go to Kurdistan and you stayed in Sinun?
R: They took us to Xane, from Sinun.
I: Where is Xane?
R: Xane Sure. 
I: And then?
R: They took us to a large house in Xane, and we stayed there for a couple of hours. Then they brought some others with us, and took us to Syria.
I: You stayed at a house in Xane, and then they took you to Syria?
R: Yes. After a couple of hours in Xane, ISIS took us to Syria.
I: What was the full name of Xane?
R: Xane Sur.
I: You were there for an hour?
R: For around 2 hours. They brought more people and took all of us to Syria.
I: Which city did they take you in Syria?
R: I don’t know which town it was. They put us in a school building and surrounded us.
I: Was it in Syria?
R: Yes. We were surrounded by ISIS. They took the men away, and took us to another place. Then they told us to convert to Islam, or they would kill us all.
I: And then?
R: Then we stayed there for around a month.
I: Did you stay in that school for a month?
R: For a month we stayed in that school. Then they told us to become Muslims, or they will kill us all. Then we said okay, we converted to Islam. We had handcuffs and they cut them. They recorded our names. They asked my father how many daughters he has.
I: Did they change your names?
R: They wrote down our names. They asked my father how many daughters he has, and he said three. They said that it’s not certain if he has three daughters. They wrote down our names, and separated us. They took us to a window. We were holding the hands of our father, and they started beating us to separate us, and they took us away. They beat us until we are separated. We tried to hold on to my father’s sweater from behind, but they beat us with huge sticks, and took us away from our father. They took us into a bus.
I: They separated you from your father and took you to a bus? What about your mother? Was she taken to a bus too?
R: Yes, they took her too. They separated all three of us from my father. They put us in a bus and brought us to Iraq, from Syria. 
I: From Syria to Iraq?
R: In four busses. One for girls, one for men, and others for families. Then they left the men in Sinjar, they didn’t bring them further. Then they took our bus and the family bus to Mosul. But our bus moved away, changed direction. They separated us from the families. Then they took us to a small town in Mosul, that’s Hayy al-Qadr. They put us in a large house.
I: You stayed at a house in Hayy al-Qadr?
R: Yes, at a house. We spent the night there. There were so many girls. At six in the morning they brought other girls too. Then they separated beautiful girls from the others. They separated married ones too. If anyone refused to go with them, they were beating us to almost death. When girls lied, saying that they were married, they took them to the bath and checked if she was married or not. And if they are maidens, they were beating them. Then they separated me from my sisters. They took them elsewhere, and took me to another place.
I: Where did you go after that?
R: They took me to Baac.
I: Where is Baac?
R: It’s also close to Sinjar. Then they brought both of my sisters to Tel Afer. They took us to Baac in two busses. They put us into a huge house. After 2 days, a young girl, Cilan, she killed herself. She killed herself in the bathroom. They didn’t let us see her, and they took us out of that house immediately.
I: They took you out?
R: Yes, and took us to a village of Baac, called Mizdefshta.
I: There was noone in Mizdefshta?
R: No, it was deserted. It’s another Yazidi village. I stayed there for two days. There was a woman with ISIS, she was an Arab. She used to beat us, she was the worst person ever.
I: How long did you stay there?
R: For two days. And then they separated us again by beating. I was with five or six girls. One of my cousins was also with us. They wanted to take her, but we held onto her and didn’t let them take her.
I: How many people were there?
R: We were four girls, ISIS wanted to take one of my cousins but we didn’t let them.
I: I see, they wanted to take her away, but you didn’t let them.
R: Yes, we wanted my cousin to be with us. And then they took us into a bus, we were around 20 girls. It was night time. They were beating us, kicking us to force us into the bus. They were beating us to almost death. They took us into the bus.
I: Where did they take you?
R: To Telbenad and Telqesap
I: Telbenad and Telqesap?
R: Yes
I: How long did you stay in Telbenad and Telqesap?
R: They took us to a house in Telbenad. Their cousins, their friends, whomever they were, they came and took us one by one. An ISIS member came and told them that we are only girls, and some other men came and took girls among us.
I: Who did they take?
R: The girls
I: How many were you?
R: Around twenty.
I: How long did you stay there?
R: My cousin came, acted as if he was my brother, and took me. And then they took us the girls to another house, even f my brother was with us. Four of my cousins were there. They came to me and tok me out of there. It was me an four other girls. They took us into a house and there were ten more girls in the house.
I: You went to that house?
R: We stayed in that house for a day. I was with four of my cousins. Two girls from Telqesap. And the others were from the village around They were also Yazidis. Then they took us to Telqesap.
I: You went back?
R: Yes, back again to Telqesap. And then when we were in Telqesap…
I: Did you stay for a night?
R: Yes. Then a man came, and insisted that he wants a girl.
I: Was he from ISIS?
R: Yes
I: Which girl did he want?
R: Her name…
I: Ah not you?
R: No, not me, she was also a Yazidi. And then I said that I want to go to my cousins.
I: Your cousin, who said that he was your brother?
R: Yes.
I: So, ISIS took you to your brother?
R: Yes
I: Why?
R: Because they were my family
I: You were allowed to see your family?
R: Yes. After I went to them, my younger cousin Ragip, he was in their hands. He gave me back to ISIS. I was in their hands again and stayed there for a month.
I: Where was it?
R: In Telbenad.
I: Who took you there, ISIS?
R: Yes, me and my cousin.
I: For a month you stayed there?
R: Yes, I stayed in Telbenad for a month. First they came and took the men into buses. Then they wantedto take us too. We asked where the men were. They told us that they took them away, and now it was our turn. We refused to leave without the men. So they brought my uncle with us too. They took us to Kocho.
I: They took all of you to Kocho?
R: Yes, we all were taken to Kocho and we stayed there for around a month. Someone came and told us that they were going to take us to our families.
I: Where were your parents?
R: In Geyara
I: Who was that person who came and told you that they’ll take you to your family?
R: Someone…
I: From ISIS?
R: Yes. But we refused to leave, and told him to bring our families to us.
I: And he brought your families?
R: Yes, he did.
I: You have found your mother and father?
R: Yes. We got reunited. My parents, my grandma, my uncles, my family was there in Kocho for a month, and then they took all of us to Qizilquyu.
I: They took all of you to Qizilquyu?
R: Yes.
I: How long did you stay there?
R: They took us to Qizilquyu and they have brought two of my sisters to us too.
I: (German)
R: (German) I forgot to tell, they separated us again, as men and women.
I: I see, it’s okay.
R: They separated us, and put the men in a school building. They took us to a house close to the school. And then they came again and took some women from us. I was with my mother. Someone approached my mother and asked “who is she?” and my mother replied “my daughter”. Then they didn’t take me. They took some other girls and they beat them. Some of them tried to escape and they shouted “stop or we will kill you”.
I: ISIS said that?
R: Yes
I: Where did you and your parents reunite?
R: In Kocho 
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape? VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin? VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: Now I’ll ask about your escape.
R: We were in Qizilquyu and they took us to Mosul. We stayed there for a couple of months. There again they were taking women and girls among us.
I: They took them from you…
R: After they were taken we cut our hair short. I tried to disguise as a boy.
I: And then?
R: I got dressed like a boy. Me and a friend of mine. We tried to disguise as boys. Then they took us to Heryrelxedara.
I: How long did you stay there?
R: Yes, we were there. ISIS came and took photos of older ones. They told that they were taking them to Kurdistan.
I: ISIS said that?
R: Yes, they took the older ones to Kurdistan. I was always hiding when ISIS came in. When they were looking for girls, I was under five or six blankets and quilts. I was hiding under a pile of blankets for three hours.
I: Your father had hidden you?
R: Yes, my father did that. They were taking girls and an ISIS member came and stood right in front of me. My grandma stood up and blocked his view until he is gone.
I: Yes, then?
R: When ISIS was gone and it was safe, they took me out. My grandma said that she thought I was suffocated until now. My uncles were there. They took the girls, and took us to Heyrelxeyran.
I: How long did you stay there?
R: Approximately two months.
I: Where did you go after Heyrelxeyran?
R: They took the elders to Kurdistan. They separated men from women again. They took the men to the school, us to a house. My father was with them, and he managed to escape.
I: Your father escaped?
R: My father found a chance to escape and they were looking for him to kill him. My father was hiding in one of the houses, and me and my mother followed my father.
I: You escaped?
R: Yes, we joined my father at 5 a.m.
I: How did you escape?
R: We escaped at 5 in the morning and we stayed hidden until 8 p.m. We didn’t have food or water. My father asked me if I can go out and bring water and food. I went out, took some food, water, and cigarettes for my father.
I: You brought cigarettes for your father?
R: Yes. When I came back, my father asked me to go and tell my uncles. I went to their house, but they were not there. My father asked me “what are you going to tell them if you get caught?”, and I said “Don’t worry father, if I get caught, I would not tell them about you.” It was 8 p.m.
I: When could you escape?
R: After hiding there for 4 days and 4 nights.
I: And you went to Kurdistan?
R: We stayed at a house who came to help us. At night we got out and met with someone else. We reached a place close to our village, and we have seen the Peshmerge.
I: Peshmerge came to your help?
R: Yes. And Peshmerge took us to a place called Pire ewre.
I: What’s that?
R: It’s the name of a place. A peshmerge approached me and patted me on the head. He thought I was a boy. I told him that I am not a boy, and he thought I was joking. I said really, I’m not a boy, and he started crying. He was surprised. He didn’t believe that I was a girl at first.
I: And then, where did you go?
R: We went to Kurdistan.
I: Which town?
R: Xanike
I: Next to Dohuk?
R: Yes
I: Did Peshmerge take you there, or did you go by yourself?
R: Peshmerge brought a bus, and we went with that.
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being? H01 chiqes pisbune daishe ( ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend? H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: Do you think that your experience with ISIS affected your health?
R: It was very bad.
I: I know, what you’ve been through was very bad. But did it affect your health, or is your health good?
R: My health is not so good, but we are trying to be strong.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being? H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê chu saxbuna we bedilend? H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced? H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine? H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain H04 Êş (eshek) H04 Schmerz
I: I see, do you have any pain anywhere?
R: No
I: It’s not about your psychology, it’s about your medical health. I’ll also ask about it too. So, you are alright?
R: Yes
I: Okay. Now I’ll ask you and you can reply.
R: Okay.
I: Is there any pain in your abdomen?
R: No
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause) H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you feel sensitivity?
R: No
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties) H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi) H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you feel your body is heavy while walking?
R: No
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling) H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be herzin/dejerfen H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder) H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Do you see and hear well?
R: Yes
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel short of breath?
R: Sometimes I do.
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance) H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte wekî dinya li dora we digere H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you get dizzy?
R: I used to have that before coming to Germany. It was because of some deficiency in my blood. But now I’m alright, I don’t feel dizzy.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats) H11 dle ta deshe H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Do you have heart problems?
R: No.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea) H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Stomach problems?
R: No
H13 Do you have any other symptoms? H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)? H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group Group 
I: Any pain in any part of your body?
R: No.
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned? H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn? H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine? H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any? H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye? H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health? H18 Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin? H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: You’ve said that you feel short of breath sometimes. Does that have anything to do with ISIS, or you have it from before?
R: No, it started after I escaped from the hands of ISIS.
I: Why do you think that happened?
R: It happened because I was so terrified.
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health: H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir? H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
I: I’ll again ask you questions that you can reply in numbers, okay?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence) H20 Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel) H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Your bad experiences with ISIS, how much did it affect your psychology?
R: Very much.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction) H21 lashe ta, misal (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms) H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi) H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins) H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you think what happened to you is a punishment from God? Do you think this situation is related to the God?
R: It’s not a punishment, but it’s volition of God.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people? H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye navbera we u milete kiri? H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How much has your experience with ISIS affect your social life, in your relationships with people? Do you realize any difference or an effect of that on your social life? Do you talk like you used to? Are you the same as you used to be? Did it change anything within you?
R: Yes, it has changed me a lot.
I: But did it affect your relationships with people, or are you just like you used to be?
R: I am like I used to be.
I: So, you haven’t changed?
R: I became somewhat more of an angry person.
I: You became angry?
R: Yes
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community? H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye? H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: How much did your experience affect your faith? I mean, this happened because you are a Yazidi. Do you think you changed after what happened? Or are you just like you used to be?
R: Yes, I am like I used to be.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion? H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî? H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: Do you feel distant from Yazidis?
R: No matter what, we are Yazidis.
I: So, it didn’t change?
R: No.
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith? H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we? H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: What you lived, did it affect your faith? Has your faith increased or decreased after what happened?
R: I am a Yazidi and my faith in Yazidism has grown stronger.
I: It became even stronger?
R: Yes, we are Yazidis forever.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith? H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari) we ji bo diyanet yizidi? H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I: So, your Yazidi faith has increased after what happened?
R: Yes
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence? H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî? H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: How do you get over it when you feel suffocated? How do you forget about yourself? For example, some people go out and walk, some others do something else. What do you do?
R: I want to be alone.
I: You want to be alone when you feel like that.
R: Yes. I don’t want to talk to anyone and I go out if it feels too much.
I: Do you take medication when you feel suffocated?
R: No.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief? H30 çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)? H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence? H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê : H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now I’ll ask you some other questions and you can rate them, okay?
R: Okay
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family) H32 te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet) H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: How much do you believe that people are helping or trying to help Yazidis? Do you feel lonely? Or do you think you get strength from the people around you?
R: I don’t know.
I: Okay, let’s say Yazidis are all with you, and they are supporting you. Does it help you, or do you think you get over it through your own strength?
R: By myself.
I: So, not with Yazidis?
R: Both with Yazidis, and both by myself.
I: How much with Yazidis? Your Yazidi friends stand with you. From 0 to 4, how much strength does it give you?
R: Three
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength) H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî) H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: And you by yourself?
R: A lot.
H34 Praying H34 limê kirin H34 Beten
I: Do you pray?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: I always pray
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone) H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: You said that you like being alone. How much?
R: It’s not nice to be alone all the time, and it’s not nice to have someone around all the time.
I: Okay. How much do you want to be alone?
R: Three.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS) H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we) H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Do you struggle inside, to get far from thoughts? Do you want to get far?
R: Yes, I’m trying to get far, but they still come to my mind.
I: You struggle within?
R: Yes.
I: Does it help you?
R: Yes, it does, but not much.
I: Can we say two?
R: Yes.
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you want to talk, do you talk about your bad experiences? With your family or friends?
R: Sometimes.
I: Shall we say two?
R: Yes
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists) H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst) H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Do you like going to a psychologist
I: I don’t like visiting doctors.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39 alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Do you want your Yazidi friends and family to help you? Does it make you feel better?
R: Yes. We all should help each other in this.
I: From 0 to 4?
R: 2.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope? H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe. H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Is there anything else that you do to forget your experiences, do you occupy yourself with anything?
R: I will not forget whatever happens. 
Group Group 
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being. H45 Niha ezê navê reya bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood) H46 îlaç (derman) H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Do you use psychiatric medication?
R: No.
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi) H47 Psychologen
I: Have you been to a psychologist?
R: No.
H48 Individual psychotherapy H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari) H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: After what happened, some Yazidis went to Lalesh, did you go there?
R: Yes, I went to Lalesh.
I: Did it make you feel better?
R: Yes, it was so nice.
H51 Herbal medicine H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati) H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
(incomprehensible)
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare) H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan) H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: The social services here, do they help you? Ah, you don’t have a direct connection with them. Maybe your mother is in contact, right?
R: I don’t ask that to my mother.
H53 Doctor or physician H53 toxter? H53 Ärzte
I: Do you go to the doctor? Do you have a doctor?
R: Yes, I go when I feel sick.
I: Do they help you, are they good?
R: It’s not only my doctors, they are for all of us.
I: I see, the doctor for all of you.
R: Yes.
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help? H54 Toxter: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H55 If medication: how much did it help? H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help? H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: I see. Let’s assume you have a psychologist. Wouldn’t it make you feel good? Don’t you want that?
R: No.
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help? H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help? H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help? H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: When you were in Lalesh, did you feel happy to see it?
R: Yes, it was so nice.
I: Did you feel good in Lalesh?
R: Yes, I felt so good. Sheikh Father told us that we are Yazidis, and the people who are close to us are also Yazidis.
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help? H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help? H61 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike? H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet? H64 Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye? H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Is there anything else you need here apart from social services, doctor, etc? Is there anytinh that you want to have?
R: No, I don’t need anything else. I just think, if we would go to another city, that would be better for us.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Now we are coming to the last part. I’ll ask you, and you can rate.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: (Arabic)
R: Yes, I can say I often think about it.
I: How much?
R: 3
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu) H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have sleeping problems, can you sleep?
R: Yes, sometimes I feel scared in my sleep.
I: How much?
R: 2
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Are there anything that makes you think?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: 3.
H69 I felt irritable and angry H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you think you are an angry person?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist. H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: When you feel angry, upset, do you try to calm yourself?
R: Yes, I try, but I can’t stop it.
I: How much do you try?
R: I try so hard to be not angry, but I can’t.
I: Let’s say 4?
R: Yes.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Do they fall into your mind, when you don’t want to think?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: 3.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Have you ever felt like your experience was a dream?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist. H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you try to stay away from what comes to your mind?
R: I struggle, but I can’t do that.
I: How much?
R: 3.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind H74 suret e ten sari ta H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do you see their faces in front of your eyes, when you close your eyes?
R: Yes, if I look at Facebook, I can’t sleep that night.
I: So, their faces pop in front of your eyes?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Do you feel afraid and jumpy?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: 3.
H76 I tried not to think about it H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim. H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try hard to not think?
R: I try hard, but I can’t do that.
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie. H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: When you are thinking about things that make you feel bad, do you calm yourself saying “I am okay, I am strong, I won’t be upset”? Do you act in that way?
R: Yes, I try hard. I try so hard, but still I get upset.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder) H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Do you feel numb when you think about it?
R: Yes, often.
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir. H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Do you feel as if you were still there, when you are thinking?
R: Yes, sometimes.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir. H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have troubke sleeping? I mean, do you have trouble falling asleep?
R: When I lie down, I sleep. But I wake up with bad dreams, and cannot fall asleep.
I: I see. You can fall asleep, but when you have nightmares you cannot go back to sleep, and you think.
R: Yes.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Do you have your experiences like water waves, coming and going away?
R: Yes, sometimes.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim. H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you ever say that you’ll not think about it anymore, it’s all over?
R: I say that to myself a lot. But then, I find myself thinking again.
I: Are you trying to take it out of your mind?
R: I really try hard, but I cannot.
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H83 I had trouble concentrating H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir. H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you feel absent-minded?
R: Sometimes I feel lost in my thoughts.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: Do you feel nauseated, suffocated, or palpitations when you are thinking?
R: I feel really bothered when I am thinking.
I: Do you have those?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: 2-3
H85 I had dreams about it H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît. H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you have nightmares?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Three
H86 I felt watchful and on guard H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir. H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel scared?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Two
H87 I tried not to talk about it H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim. H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Do you try not to talk about what you’ve lived?
R: Yes, I don’t talk about it when I don’t want to.
I: No, do you struggle to not talk about it?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Three. 
H88 Thank you for these responses. H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I: Thank you for your responses to the questions we asked.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany? H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne? H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Since you came to Germany, what are some good experiences you have had in here?
R: It’s been very good. Learning a new language… But it would be better if we were in another city.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time? H90 tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu? H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: You know the project that brought you here from Iraq. Are you pleased with it?
R: I am very pleased. 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion? H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota? H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Why so pleased?
R: They help us a lot, they have brought us here. I thank Germany so much for accepting us. They have helped us a lot.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion? H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota? H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Is there anything that you are not pleased?
R: I want to go to another city. I want my whole family reunited again.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future? H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)? H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: Do you feel hopeful for your future? Where does this hope come from?
R: Our hope comes from God
I: Only God?
R: Yes
I: Thank you, it’s over. Thank you for coming, thanks for your time. Do you have a question?
R: I don’t have any questions. I just want my sisters to come here.
I: I wish that too, but there’s nothing we can do. We are only here to make your voice heard.
R: I see. Thank you.
I: Thank you, good bye.
R: You too.