Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
Audio file name: [049]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself. C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim. C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you? C02 Tu çend salî yî? C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
C04 What is your marital status? C04 Tu zewiciyi yan na? C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner? C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?” C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any? C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn? C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
C07 Who are they? C07 Ew kî ne? C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)? C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language? C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn? C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
C10 What is your highest education level? C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: Did you go to school in Iraq?
R: No.
C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school? C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)? C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: What about here?
R: Here I am going to school.
I: Are you going to language courses here?
R: Yes.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future? C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî, tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê? C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed? C14 Tu nahe kar diki? C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Are you working, do you have a job?
R: How is that?
I: Are you working outside your home?
R: No, only house work. I take care of the children.
C15 If yes, what is your current work? C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî? C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment? C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki? C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Do you want to find a job after learning the language?
R: Yes
I: So, you want to?
R: Yes
C18 If not, why not? C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki? C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home? C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir? C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Before ISIS entered into Iraq, were you working?
R: No, only housework.
I: You were at home?
R: Yes.
C20 If yes, what was your work? C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir? C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any? C22 dine te chiya? C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion?
R: Yazidism
C23 Please specify your religion C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group? C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî? C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: What’s your ethnicity? I mean, which people are you from? Kurdish, Turkish, Arabic, Turcoman, Yazidi?
R: Yazidi.
C25 Please specify your ethnic group C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye? C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS Pêşik û Şertên niha Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
I: What life plans do you have now? What do you think about? If you don’t want to answer, you can say that.
R: Alright.
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today? D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye? D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What are you thinking about your life, what are you interested in?
R: Honestly, I just wish my mother to come here too. I don’t have any other wishes. I want to reunite with my family, who are still in their hands. That’s all.
I: Where is your mother?
R: In the hands of ISIS
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life? D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe? D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need to build your life?
R: How?
I: What do you feel is necessary to rebuild your life?
R: Honestly, I don’t understand what you say.
I: What are you in need of… Do you know Arabic?
R: Yes, I understand Arabic.
I: (Asks in Arabic) It’s better that I speak Kurdish. What do you need to build, to improve your life?
R: I think it’s normal.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now? D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye? D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: How dominant are you over your life? We are taking notes here in numbers, from 0 to 4. How powerful do you think you are?
R: I don’t have power, at all.
D04 What do you think the future holds for you? D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye? D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you foresee in your future?
R: Honestly, my future… I don’t fully understand your question.
I: I mean, people think about their future. What do you think about it?
R: I don’t think about the future. I have the present day. When the day is over, it’s all over.
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live? D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî? D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation improves in Iraq, would you return to Iraq, to Kurdistan, to any other country, or would you stay in Germany?
R: I wouldn’t go anywhere else.
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location? D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir? D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
I: Why?
R: I am not fond of over there.
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany? D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe? D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: Do you feel Germany as your own country?
R: Iraq?
I: Not Iraq, here.
R: We didn’t have much feelings about Iraq.
I: What about here?
R: Here, we are respected. We can act as I wish, in here. We were incapable in Iraq. I was not allowed to act alone, even go to the market in Iraq. Here, it’s accepted as normal. I really don’t like it over there. Here, it’s better.
I: But do you feel Germany as your homeland?
R: Yes.
I: A lot, few, or normal?
R: Yes, because Germany has done all this for us. Our old country did nothing.
I: I see, do you see Germany as your hometown.
R: Yes. 
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years? D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû? D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: How good has your experience been in Germany in these 2 years?
R: It has been good.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way? D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin? D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: How good has it been?
R: In the last two years?
I: Yes
R: They’ve always been so nice to me.
I: Why?
R: They’re so nice. They do things just for us. They have been doing everything for us until now.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe? D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye? D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: What needs to change, for you to return to Iraq or Kurdistan?
R: I don’t understand.
I: In your opinion, what is needed, what needs to happen in Iraq, for you to be able to return to Iraq or Kurdistan?
R: What I’m saying is I would return, if Iraq belongs to all people, and if we have law for everyone. Currently, there’s no law, there’s nothing. We fled, we escaped and came here. It’s not possible for us to return.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic. E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you? E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be? E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: Do you know what justice means?
R: Does that mean power?
I: No. It means that you take your rights back from someone who violates your rights.
R: Does that mean that we take our revenge?
I: Rather than taking revenge, taking your rights back from a wrong-doer is also justice. What do you think when someone asks you what justice means for you?
R: There’s nothing in our power. Yazidis have nothing in their hands. There’s nothing we can do.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS? E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e? E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it that your rights are given to you?
R: Very so. What do you mean ‘how important’? I want to get my rights back from them. I would be relieved.
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice? E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in? E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: Do you believe that your rights will be given to you?
R: Not for now. No.
I: None?
R: If it were to be done, it should have already happened. All this cruelty… A human can’t know what to say… 
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions? E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete? E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it for you that ISIS, those who brought this disaster on you are prosecuted?
R: It’s very important.
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way? E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da? E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Why?
R: What do you mean “why”? Did they do something small? They killed all the villagers. They kidnapped women and children.
E06 Who should be held accountable? E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye? E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who do you think should be prosecuted? There are commanders in ISIS, foot soldiers, and children?
R: From youngest to oldest, all of them should be prosecuted.
E07 And how should they be held accountable? E07 çawa? E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: What punishment do you think should be given for them?
R: What do you mean?
I: What should be done to them, how do you think should they be punished?
R: They all should be gathered, left without food and water until they die.
I: Do you think taking them to a court to prosecute them is sufficient, or should more be done?
R: They would never be corrected, they would never change for better. I stayed among them for six months. Even if you put them in prison for a hundred years, they would still never be corrected even a bit.
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike? E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Have you heard of any efforts to give the rights of Yazidis back to them?
R: How so?
I: I mean, have you heard of anyone who look out for the rights of Yazidis?
R: Yes
E09 If yes, which ones? E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in? E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
I: Who?
R: The whole world. I see so many things on Facebook. But I know there’s nothing that can be done for Yazidis. 
I: You mean there are some efforts, but they can’t do anything.
R: They are trying.
I: Do you know who they are? Who are trying?
R: I just know that they are not Yazidis themselves, but I don’t know who they are.
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence? E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin? E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is it possible for you to forgive them?
R: Forgive who?
I: Those who brought this evil on to you.
R: Never. How can I forgive them? I am not saying that all Muslims are the same. There are good and evil ones among them. I know some of the good ones, but I cannot believe that their religion is the same. I don’t understand that.
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive? E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki? E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: I see. If an ISIS member asks for your forgiveness, what should happen so that you can forgive?
R: How can I forgive? If I see an ISIS member, caught and brought to me, I would definitely kill him. And even then, I wouldn’t have justice.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic. E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: Do you want to know the news about ISIS, or you want tbe be uninterested?
R: News about them? No, I don’t want. I see it on Facebook. Peshmerge captures many of them, but they do nothing. They just record videos, saying that they were commanders of this and that. But nothing is done to them. What they did to villagers, is not being done to them. If there was a law, the same should be done to them.
I: So, you think that whatever ISIS did to you, should be done to them. Do you think Iraqi soldiers and Kurdish soldiers can drive ISIS out of Iraq?
R: Yes, I believe that. But not Hashd Al-Shaabi. They are Shia. But the others can do that. I believe that, but not the Shia ones.
I: Which soldiers did you say? Hashd Al-Shaabi?
R: Yes.
I: And you said Shia soldiers, right?
R: Yes, they are taking their own revenge.
I: Only their own revenge, or for everyone?
R: For themselves.
I: Are there any Yazidis among them?
R: Yes, there are Yazidis both among them, and within Peshmerge. ISIS members are surrendering themselves to the Kurds via Tel Afer. To Kurds of Dohuk. Dohuk Kurds say that they are both muslims, so they don’t do anything to them. ISIS members also say they are both muslims. When ISIS first entered into our village, these Kurds fled. Those soldiers stepped back. Now some ISIS members are surrendering to the same Kurds. And they give them water to drink, and food to eat. What would you think?
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it for you that the whole world knows what ISIS did to you?
R: It’s very important for me.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: Is it important for you that future generations know?
R: The whole universe should know what they did to Yazidis.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened? E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu? E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened? E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu? E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: What do you think should be done to have the whole universe know about what ISIS did?
R: I don’t know. I came here, and I still don’t know. I believe Yazidis should have what other governments already have. This is the 74th death toll on us. This was the 74th Yazidi genocide. The whole world should know that. When they hear we are Yazidis, they ask us: “what is that?”. We don’t like this. Before this last genocide, so many states didn’t know who Yazidis are.
I: But now, do they know?
R: Now some of them knows, but some of them are still uninformed.
I: So, how will everyone learn what happened to Yazidis? How will the children of your children learn about it?
R: We will tell it to our children, and they will tell it to theirs. We had heard about 3 genoicides on Yazidis. We didn’t know how it was, and we have seen it, experienced it ourselves. They used to tell us, but not the details. We will tell our children.
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission? E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)? E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Do you know what a commission is?
R: Yes
I: Have you heard of a truth commission?
R: A commission came here before, but I don’t know which commission they were.
I: Here?
R: Yes.
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes? E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre? E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: No, no. Truth Commission are formed by the government. This commission is sent to the crime area. They investigate for the crimes. After the investigation, they write about all the crimes committed. Do you understand? Do you think such a commission is good? Should such a commission be created for crimes committed against you?
R: Yes, it should be created, why not?
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS? E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish? E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: In general, what should be done for the victims of ISIS?
R: What we say is, no one should refrain from doing anything. Yazidis will never forget what we’ve been through, till doomsday. So many Yazidis come here. We all see the situation they are in. They need to be brought here by the government. So many of them just cry to ther misery. I know so many like this. Some are alone, some have a child, some have more.
I: So, nobody protected them in Iraq?
R: No
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis? E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe? E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: And what should be done for Yazidi victims?
R: What we want is to have a voice. We want our law to be regarded. We should have self-governance, in our own cities. We shouldn’t have any dependency on Iraqi soldiers. Yazidis cannot be helped as long as they are under the protection of Iraqi soldiers.
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim? E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen? E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: How much do you see yourself as a victim?
R: How so?
I: Do you think people see you as a victim, do you think they understand that you had been subjected to such cruelty?
R: Not so much any more. Mostly, they are happy.
I: Do people understand that you were a captive, when they look at you?
R: The ones who know me know about it, but the others don’t.
E23 Why do you feel that way? E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin? E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE Aşitî Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions. F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim. F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq? F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)? F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: According to you, is it possible to have peace in Iraq?
R: I don’t believe there’ll be peace in Iraq.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries? F02 Û li fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her welêtiki?” F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: And in the middle east?
R: What’s that?
I: Arabic countries such as Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Jordan…
R: They cause this trouble on themselves.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? F03 Ji bo aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe? F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: According to you, what should be done to ensure peace in Iraq?
R: I don’t believe there can be peace in Iraq in any way. For 13 years Iraq is in this situation.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS? F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe? F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq? F05 Û ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe? F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: According to you, how can Yazidis be protected?
R: How?
I: How can Yazidis in Iraq be protected?
R: What I’m saying is, Yazidis should protect themselves. Peshmerges fled, and we had no control, no arms, nothing.
I: So, Yazidis should have the control in their own hands?
R: If Yazidis have self-rule, no one can do anything. They can protect themselves. If they have arms and supplies, they can protect the women and children. If somebody else has them, they’ll just flee again. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through. G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS? G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)? G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, have you talked about your experiences?
R: No, but I talked maybe 10 times in Iraq. Here I just went to the doctor and poured out my heart.
I: Are you still going to the psychologist?
R: Yes.
I: How many times have you been there?
R: Four.
I: How often do you go?
R: Four times in a month.
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you? G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)? G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you? G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin) G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to. G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin) G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper? G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû, (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu? G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER Heger parêzer be Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer? G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû? G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them? G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we yan hûn chun jem ? G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer? G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ? G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them? G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt? G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE [Heger shirteye) Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them? G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ? G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police? G12 hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete te bi shertede deyi ? G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them? G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt? G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book? G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî? G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you? G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin? G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
I: Do you write about yourself, about what had happened?
R: I don’t know how to write. If I learn, I want to write.
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written. G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)? G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS? G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin? G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany, how many times have you tried to get information about what happens?
R: I don’t want to know. But when something happens, others speak about it.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)? G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)? G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
G20 Where do you seek information? G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin? G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
G21 If other, please specify G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one? G22 hûn û malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: How do you communicate with the Yazidi community, your friends and family? 
R: I don’t have friends, I just talk to my family, my aunts.
I: Via WhatsApp?
R: Yes, via WhatsApp.
I: Do you exchange news via Facebook?
R: How?
I: Do you see how they are, what they are doing when you open Facebook?
R: No, I don’t use Facebook. 
G23 If other, please specify G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA TRAÛMA TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question. H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri) H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS? VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin? VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: This is the last part of our interview. We’d like to know what harm you’ve been through.
R: What can I say?
I: It’ll be about your health, about the effects of that maltreatment on your health. I know that you’ve been through a lot. I’ll just ask you questions and you can tell me if you don’t want to answer.
R: If you ask…
I: I’ll not ask you anything too personal.
R: No, there’s nothing personal that they did to me. They did not lay their hands on me, because I was pregnant. They had a filthy religion, the religion of ISIS… But they didn’t touch a woman if she was pregnant.
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity? VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man? VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: How long did you stay in the hands of ISIS?
R: Six months.
I: Which village are you from?
R: Tel Qasil.
I: Where did they take you after Tel Qasil?
R: We went to Qini. I mean we escaped to Qini when they came. They came to Qini and caught us there.
I: In Qini?
R: Yes, it was an afternoon, around 4 p.m.
I: How long did you spend there?
R: From 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. we were in Qini. Then they came and caught us. They separated us. They took all the men and killed them at a valley. My brother was among them, but he escaped.
I: Could he escape?
R: Yes, he’s here now. He’s XXXX’s husband.
I: Ah, XXXX is your brother’s wife.
R: But all the others were killed.
I: Who were the others?
R: My father, my brother’s son, he was 15. Another brother of mine, 14. So it’s my father, my brother, and 4 of my nephews.
I: Where’s your mother?
R: My mother is in their hands.
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape? VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin? VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
I: How did you escape?
R: No, they caught me.
I: No, no. How did you break free?
R: How so?
I: They caught you in Qini. What happened after that? Where did they take you?
R: They took me to Tel Afer. I stayed there for three days. And I stayed in Badush for eleven days. And then a vehicle came and took us to a school in Tel Afer. After that they took us to a village. They gathered us there, so many Yazidi women and children.
I: Where did you go after that?
R: Then they sold us. Eighty percent of us were sold, women and children. They sold us into Syria.
I: To Raqqa?
R: Yes, they took us to Raqqa. They were coming with some vehicles and they were taking us.
I: They were taking girls but didn’t take you because you were pregnant?
R: No, they took me too. Yes, I was pregnant but still they took me. They told me that I was going to be their servant until I give birth.
I: Who said that? ISIS members?
R: Yes, the man from ISIS. They were pressuring me into performing salaah. I always refused. God gave me my religion, and I’ll stay in my religion I always said. They were attacking me because I didn’t convert.
I: How long did you stay in Raqqa?
R: I stayed in that house for 25 days.
I: Where did you go after that?
R: Then he sold me to someone else. He told me that he wants to take my photo. I understood why and refused. He told me that he was going to send it to my brother. I said no. Then he brought a thick stick. It was that long. And I was pregnant with my son. He said, if I didn’t pose for a photo, he was going to beat me with that stick. I took my son in my arms. He wanted to take a photo of me alone, but I refused to be photographed without my son. He took a photo and sent it to his ISIS friends, put me up for sale. Then someone saw my photo. He was another ISIS member from Syria.
I: Wait, let me translate before I forget anything… Who bought you after that?
R: I was sold to an ISIS member from Syria. He was living at some place three hours far from Raqqa. He took me there. And then he told me that he wanted to sell me to my family.
I: Your family would pay them to rescue you?
R: Yes.
I: And then?
R: Then he told me that he was not an ISIS member, but he was also kept by force. I couldn’t believe that. He told me that he cannot see his family for 4 years, he was also a captive of ISIS. He was brought there against his will and they were using him as a soldier in battle. He told me that he wanted to sell me to my family. And my family bought me, but they didn’t have the money. They were poor. He wanted to ask for the money from my brother. I called my brother, and told him that they want to rolls of banknote.
I: Two rolls make 20 thousand dollars?
R: I don’t know how much it was, they told me to say ‘2 Iraqi rolls of banknote’. My husband and my brother collected the money from our relatives and neighbours. Everyone contributed and I waited for my brother for 2 months.
I: So, they brought the money, bought you from that man, and you got rescued?
R: Yes.
I: Where did the money come from? Did they collect it from your villagers?
R: Yes. Now we are paying back our debt.
I: Didn’t you apply anywhere and ask for an aid?
R: We made an official application and went to the government office after I was rescued. They promised to pay the half, but in the end they didn’t. My husband and my brother collected that money from our relatives as a debt. Then my husband and my cousin had to move to Turkey, and they are in need.
I: You went to Turkey from Syria and continued to Kurdistan?
R: Yes. We passed from the Kurdish customs. 
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being? H01 chiqes pisbune daishe ( ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend? H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: Has your health detoriated because of the maltreatment you suffered in the hands of ISIS?
R: Of course, how can’t it? They took the children in front of my eyes…
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being? H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê chu saxbuna we bedilend? H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: Has it affected you a lot?
R: Yes, how can’t it. I can’t sleep comfortably. They are always in my nightmares. We are trying to run away, and they catch us. Not every night, but I often see such nightmares.
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced? H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine? H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now I’ll ask you questions and you’ll tell me how much you feel it from 0 to 4. Okay?
R: Okay.
H04 Pain H04 Êş (eshek) H04 Schmerz
I: In general, do you feel any pain on your body?
R: How?
I: Any pain
R: What kind of a pain?
I: Regular pain, aches…
R: On my body?
I: Yes
R: I often have headaches.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause) H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Does your skin feel sensitive?
R: Sensitive?
I: Do you feel itchy?
R: I used to have some oversensitivity but not any more. I sometimes have it.
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties) H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi) H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you feel fatigue?
R: I sometimes feel a normal level of fatigue.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling) H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be herzin/dejerfen H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you faint, do you fall down?
R: No.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder) H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: How are your eyes, ears, nose, mouth? Are they well?
R: I don’t see well.
I: Both eyes?
R: Both.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel short of breath?
R: Yes, often I feel short of breath.
I: Very often?
R: Yes, very often. Whenever I see a bearded man, I shiver and feel suffocated.
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance) H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte wekî dinya li dora we digere H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you feel dizzy?
R: I don’t feel dizzy but I feel suffocated.
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats) H11 dle ta deshe H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Heart pain?
R: No
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea) H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Stomach, abdomen pain?
R: No.
H13 Do you have any other symptoms? H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)? H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group Group 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned? H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn? H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine? H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any? H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye? H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health? H18 Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin? H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: Do you think these pains you mentioned are related with your bad experiences?
R: I didn’t suffer from them before. I started having it after I was rescued.
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health: H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir? H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence) H20 Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel) H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Do you think these pains you mentioned are psychological?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction) H21 lashe ta, misal (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think these pains have physical causes?
R: I feel short of breath and I tremble when I think about what had happened there.
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms) H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi) H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins) H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you think these pains are caused by God?
R: How so?
I: Do you think God makes you feel these pains?
R: These are pains that I happen to have.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people? H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye navbera we u milete kiri? H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: Have your bad experiences affect your relationship with people?
R: How so?
I: After ISIS, has there been any change in your relationships, a distance, or is it just like it used to be?
R: I have always been at home. I didn’t have any friends, a job or school.
I: So, you don’t want to be in contact?
R: No, only with my family.
I: How is your communication with your children?
R: It’s good. But my older son has been through a lot, and he’s not well. I’m taking him to therapy as well.
I: Are you closer to eachother now, or are you drifting apart?
R: We are so close. But my older son remembers captivity.
I: How old is he?
R: He’s four. After our captivity, he still wants me to be always next to him. If I’m not there for a moment, he collapses the world with his cries, asking ‘where is mom?’. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community? H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye? H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: How are your relationships with the Yazidi community around you? Are you close to them, or far?
R: How?
I: I mean, do you act together with other Yazidis around you?
R: I don’t have any contacts, my only relationship is with my family.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion? H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî? H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith? H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we? H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Has your faith in God changed after ISIS?
R: I will believe in God until the end of the world.
I: But has it become weaker or stronger?
R: It has gone weaker.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith? H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari) we ji bo diyanet yizidi? H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence? H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî? H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: What do you do to forget about your experiences?
R: I don’t want to forget. I’ve told the doctor not to prescribe me medication to forget. And they say okay, let’s just chat.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief? H30 çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)? H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: Do you take medication for your body, for your feeling of suffocation for example?
R: Only when I have headaches. Not for my breath.
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence? H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê : H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
I: Now I’ll read you a list, and you’ll say how much you have it. Okay?
R: Okay
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family) H32 te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet) H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Spending time with your family makes you feel better?
R: Yes
I: How much? Very much, or normal?
R: Very much. We are the remedy for one another’s wounds.
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength) H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî) H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe in yourself? Do you think you can take care of yourself?
R: Of course, I think I can.
I: How much?
R: Normal
H34 Praying H34 limê kirin H34 Beten
I: Praying helps you feel better?
R: Yes
I: How much? Three? Four?
R: Three.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone) H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Do you want to stay alone, or you always want to be with your family?
R: I want to be with my family. I feel lonely when I’m alone.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS) H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we) H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Do you want to avoid remembering your experiences?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: To forget about the things I don’t want to remember, I occupy myself with other things.
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists) H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst) H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: You’ve just said you want to go to the psychologist, haven’t you?
R: Yes.
I: Talkin to them helps you feel better? How much?
R: I think it helps me very much.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39 alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: You’ve said that you spend time with your family, and not with your friends, right?
R: I don’t have any friends.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope? H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe. H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you do anything else to forget?
R: I don’t do anything else. I go to school.
I: Do you forget about your experiences when you go to school?
R: Yes. But I have some problems with some people there, too.
Group Group 
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being. H45 Niha ezê navê reya bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: Now I’m going to ask you other questions, about doctors and medication. And you’ll reply as yes or no, okay?
R: Okay.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood) H46 îlaç (derman) H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you ever taken medication, like sleeping pills?
R: No.
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi) H47 Psychologen
I: Have you been to a psychologist?
R: Yes
H48 Individual psychotherapy H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari) H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: After your experiences have you gone to Lalesh, have you seen a religious leader?
R: No, I haven’t. 
H51 Herbal medicine H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati) H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Do you use herbal medicine?
R: No, only tea.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare) H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan) H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Do they come from social to help you?
R: Yes, they come for my help.
H53 Doctor or physician H53 toxter? H53 Ärzte
I: Do you go to the regular medical doctor?
R: Yes
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help? H54 Toxter: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did they help?
R: How so?
I: Let’s say you have a stomach ache and you go to a doctor… You’ve been to a doctor?
R: Yes, I go to the doctor. The family doctor that comes from the social. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help? H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help? H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: You’ve said that psychologist helps you. How much does it help?
R: I pour my troubles out, and I get relieved. I tell them things that I can’t tell anyone else.
I: I see, you tell everything to them.
R: I tell every single thing I remember, and they try to help me.
I: They try to help you a lot?
R: Yes. 
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help? H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help? H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help? H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help? H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help? H61 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike? H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet? H64 Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye? H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: What kind of a help could be done for you, apart from what we talked? Do you need anything else?
R: No.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Now we’ll ask you some quick questions. Okay?
R: Okay
I: And you’ll reply from 0 to 4.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: How often do you experiences come to your mind?
R: So often.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu) H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble sleeping?
R: I try to avoid remembering in bed, I talk to my children. But in my dreams, I see how we were caught, and always in different versions.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Is there anything that reminds you of ISIS when you see or hear it?
R: One day I saw a news on Facebook. An ISIS family was caught by Iraqi soldiers. They kept asking them questions. That made me remember my experiences.
H69 I felt irritable and angry H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you feel angry?
R: I am not so much of an angry person.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist. H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Do you try to avoid thinking?
R: No.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Do you remember your experiences unintentionally?
R: Yes
I: How often?
R: Sometimes.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Do you ever think as if what you’ve lived was a dream, and not real?
R: No, I never feel as if it was a dream.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist. H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you want to avoid knowing news about ISIS?
R: Sometimes I see them. It’s okay, it doesn’t matter.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind H74 suret e ten sari ta H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do the faces of ISIS members pop in front of your eyes?
R: I try to avoid thinking about them and I picture my family in my mind. But I cannot forget the torments they did to us. 
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Do you feel scared?
R: Most of the time I feel scared.
I: How much?
R: Very much.
H76 I tried not to think about it H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim. H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try not to think about your experiences?
R: No.
I: So, is it okay for you?
R: I am just thinking about them, it’s not intentional.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie. H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder) H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Do you feel numb when they come to your mind?
R: No, I don’t.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir. H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Do you feel as if you were still there?
R: Yes, when I think about it, I feel as if I were among them.
I: How much?
R: Normal.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir. H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble falling asleep?
R: Rarely.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: When you remember your experiences, does it emotionally shog you?
R: How so?
I: Does it suddenly come to your mind and pass on?
R: No, I don’t have it.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim. H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you try to throw off your experiences from your mind?
R: No.
H83 I had trouble concentrating H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir. H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you feel absent-minded?
R: Yes, so much.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: You said you felt short of breath when you think about it. How much do you have it?
R: Not so much.
H85 I had dreams about it H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît. H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you see nightmares?
R: Yes
I: How often? Too much?
R: No, not much.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir. H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel bad, always nervous? Do you feel scared?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Not much.
H87 I tried not to talk about it H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim. H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
H88 Thank you for these responses. H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany? H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne? H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: What goof experiences have you had in Germany?
R: I’ve seen many good things. It’s like a new life, a possibility to live a beautiful life. If we were back in our own country now, there’s nothing there. We were barely eating, drinking, and sleeping. It was hardly a life. Here it’s not like that. Here it’s so different from Iraq.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time? H90 tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu? H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: You know about the program that brought you here from Iraq. The project you were included in coming here. How pleased are you with this program?
R: Very very much. They help us a lot.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion? H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota? H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Why are you so pleased?
R: When we first came here, for the first three months I didn’t have any money to buy medicine for my son. My son had a fracture over here, when we were back there. We used to go to the doctor, but they said it was nothing. We came here and they have treated my both sons. They have almost become different. They are looking after my children, what else can I ask for? If we were still there, they would have no future. They were going to be ignorants like us.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion? H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota? H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Is there anything that you find disturbing in this program?
R: By God, I am so pleased.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future? H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)? H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: What are your hopes for the future?
R: I wish my family is saved from captivity. I wish my sons have a beautiful life, not a life like ours.
I: Thank you very much for your responses and your time.