050_2_MET
Instructions for using this template
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English.
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words:Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue textdirectly after the response.
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
Audio file name: [050_2]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself. C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim. C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you? C02 Tu çend salî yî? C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
C04 What is your marital status? C04 Tu zewiciyi yan na? C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner? C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?” C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any? C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn? C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
C07 Who are they? C07 Ew kî ne? C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)? C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language? C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn? C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
C10 What is your highest education level? C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Please specify your highest education level C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school? C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)? C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future? C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî, tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê? C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed? C14 Tu nahe kar diki? C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
C15 If yes, what is your current work? C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî? C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment? C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki? C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
C18 If not, why not? C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki? C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home? C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir? C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
C20 If yes, what was your work? C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir? C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any? C22 dine te chiya? C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
C23 Please specify your religion C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group? C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî? C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
C25 Please specify your ethnic group C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye? C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS Pêşik û Şertên niha Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today? D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye? D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life? D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe? D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now? D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye? D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
D04 What do you think the future holds for you? D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye? D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live? D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî? D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location? D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir? D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany? D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe? D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years? D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû? D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way? D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin? D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe? D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye? D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic. E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you? E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be? E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS? E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e? E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice? E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in? E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions? E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete? E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way? E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da? E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable? E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye? E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
E07 And how should they be held accountable? E07 çawa? E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike? E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
E09 If yes, which ones? E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in? E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence? E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin? E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive? E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki? E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic. E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS? E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te zanibi (bizani) che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de? E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened? E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu? E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened? E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu? E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission? E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)? E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes? E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre? E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS? E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish? E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis? E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe? E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim? E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen? E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: When you go out, when people see you, do you think they understand that you are a victim?
R: No.
I: Don’t they realize that?
R: No
E23 Why do you feel that way? E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin? E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why not?
R: I don’t know why. My friends here alse say that to me, that I take good care of myself. What can I say? I always smile. I cry too, so many times. But I always smile.
I: Yes.
R: This can be the reason why, but I don’t know.
I: You don’t want them to realize that?
R: No, I don’t.
PEACE Aşitî Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions. F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim. F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq? F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)? F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Is it possible to have a good situation in Iraq?
R: Do you say that it’ll be good?
I: I’m just asking f you believe that.
R: I don’t believe that.
I: Not at all? Never? How do you say that?
R: We say “(Arabic)”.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries? F02 Û li fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her welêtiki?” F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you know what “middle east” means? They are Arabic countries such as Syria, Palestine… Do you believe that they’ll be better, or don’t you believe that?
R: I don’t believe that, because (incomprehensible) is ancient. History still repeats itself.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq? F03 Ji bo aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe? F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: Yes, that was a good response. What do you think is necessary to have safety in Iraq?
R: You mean, if it happens?
I: No, no, I’m asking what should be done? (incomprehensible)
R: Honestly, what can I say? We want Arabs, Muslims to be away from Yazidis, and each have their own governments. I don’t know. If we live with Arabs, we will suffer. If we live with Kurds, yes, our language is Kurdish, they all speak like us, it’s true that we are In Kurdistan, our families are in Kurdistan, but they are still Muslims, all the same. Many of them help Yazidis, it’s true, but many, if they find the chance, they would oppress Yazidis like ISIS.
I: You think they would sell Yazidis out?
R: Yes.
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS? F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe? F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Have you heard of any military moves against ISIS in Iraq?
R: Umm
I: You haven’t heard?
R: No, they say there are attacks against them, but we don’t see anything. If there were attacks…
I: I am translating while you speak, or I’ll forget.
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq? F05 Û ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe? F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: What should be done to protect Yazidis in Iraq? Through which means Yazidis can be protected?
R: What can I say? There has been war since we came to be. If there was no war, each country would live on their own, make their own history. Why do they want to fight against each other, or against governments? I don’t know.
I: So, you want Yazidis to be on their own, with a state and territory?
R: Yes.
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through. G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS? G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)? G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, how many times have you shared your experience with ISIS? Now I’ll read you the options, and you can choose which. You never talked, once, how many times in a week, or haow many times in a month?
R: Do you meatn talks like this, or public talks?
I: For example, can we say that you talk about (incomprehensible) every day?
R: No
I: Once a month maybe?
R: No
I: How many times in a year?
R: Maybe 2 or 3 times in a year.
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you? G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)? G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: Now I’ll ask you, and you can say yes or no. When you talked about your experiences, did you talk to your family or friends about it?
R: (non-verbal answer)
I: To a psychologist?
R: Once since I came to Germany
I: With social?
R: Yes
I: Have you talked on TV?
R: No
I: To a lawyer?
R: Yes
I: In Iraq?
R: No, she was here. Amal Clooney from USA.
I: Amal Clooney was here?
R: Yes
I: You talked to Amal Clooney?
R: Yes, 2 times over Skype. And once (incomprehensible) Anna Scott was here, she’s also a lawyer, and she works with Amal Clooney.
I: Anna Scott?
R: Yes.
I: Have you talked to the police?
R: Here?
I: Either in here or in Iraq. Have you talked to the police about your experiences?
R: Yes
I: Have you ever written about your experiences on Facebook?
R: (incomprehensible)
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you? G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin) G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to. G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin) G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper? G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû, (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu? G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER Heger parêzer be Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer? G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû? G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them? G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we yan hûn chun jem ? G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer? G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ? G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
I: When you talked to the lawyer, did you know what would happen? You didn’t?
R: I asked them.
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them? G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt? G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Have you talked to them again after that talk? Did they talk to you again?
R: Who?
I: The lawyers. Did they talk to you again after that?
R: No, but I had a (…) It was about UK visa. I talked to the lawyers to go there, but I couldn’t (…)
I: So they talked to you again, they wanted to see you?
R: Yes
IF POLICE [Heger shirteye) Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them? G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ? G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
I: When you talked to the police, did they call you?
R: (incomprehensible)
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police? G12 hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete te bi shertede deyi ? G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
I: When you give information to the police, did you know what was going to happen, what they were going to do with the information?
R: (incomprehensible)
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them? G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt? G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Was that the only time you talked to the police, or did they talk to you again?
R: When I was in Iraq, I talked at the court, I talked to the police, I spoke many times in the police station, for 2 or 3 times.
I: So after that time, here, the police did not talk to you again?
R: No.
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book? G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî? G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Since you came to Germany, have you ever written about your experiences? Either on Facebook or in a book?
R: (incomprehensible)
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you? G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin? G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written. G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)? G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS? G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin? G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany, do you want to know about the news? Do you want to know what happened to ISIS in Iraq? Do you check it every day?
R: Every day, or 2 times a day.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)? G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)? G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you want to get the news?
R: I want to know. It’s important for me. It’s important that ISIS is over, we get reunited with our family, and Iraq to be nice again. To see if the ones in Iraq have a good life.
G20 Where do you seek information? G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin? G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: Where do you follow the news? Friends? Do you ask them? Or do you follow the news on Facebook?
R: Yes
I: Radio, TV, do you get news from the?
R: (incomprehensible)
G21 If other, please specify G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one? G22 hûn û malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: How do you get news about other Yazidis? How do they get news from you? Do you talk to your friends and family?
R: Yes
I: Do you use WhatsApp?
R: Yes, I do. But now I don’t have it.
I: Phone?
R: Yes
G23 If other, please specify G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA TRAÛMA TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question. H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri) H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS? VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin? VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: Now we are coming to the last part. You are free to not reply any question you don’t want. Talk however you want to. Do you understand? I mean, you don’t have to tell us everything. I’ll help you, I’ll ask and you can reply.
R: Okay
I: Is it okay?
R: Yes.
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity? VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man? VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: Which village are you from?
R: Til Ezyar
I: Til Ezyar
R: Yes
I: ISIS entered into Til Ezyar, right?
R: Yes
I: Where did you go?
R: We went to Werdiye.
I: How long did you stay in Werdiye?
R: Around 5 days. ISIS caught us in Werdiye.
I: I see, you escaped to Werdiye.
R: Yes
I: Where did you go after Werdiye?
R: ISIS took us to Tal Afar, to a school called Leshar. Then they separated us, women and children, and left us there. They took the men to another place, to Tal Afar Citadel.
I: How long did you stay in Tal Afar?
R: We stayed at this school for 4 days.
I: And then?
R: They took us to another school in Tal Afar, it was called something like Tatayeh High School.
I: Exact names are not required.
R: It was a school in Tal Afar.
I: How long did you stay in that school?
R: We stayed for a night. Me, my sister, and 4-5 cousins of mine. ISIS came and took us.
I: Where did they take you?
R: They took us to Mosul. They took us to the marketplace where girls were sold.
I: And then?
R: We stayed there. I don’t know, it was a place like a palace, maybe it was one of Saddam’s palaces. They were selling girls and women there to ISIS. What we have seen, it was really so difficult to endure. We have seen girls being sold. It was not something that can be endured. I decided to commit suicide. I went to the bath, and tried to kill myself with the glass in the bath. I cut my arms, but they heard me and broke the door to get in.
I: And then?
R: Then they handcuffed me on my back. They asked me why I tried to kill myself. I told them that I’d do anything to be free. I told them that I were married, they had my husband as well, and they are Muslims now. I asked them not to sell me. I asked “How can you sell the wife of a Muslim man?”
I: You were lying of course?
R: Yes, of course.
(Both laugh)
R: I knew that all my cousins were caught. I knew that they said that they became Muslims, not to get killed by ISIS. I gave the name of my cousin, and told them that he was my husband. There was a guard, who was watching us. I told the guard that I was married. He believed in me and he told me that I was going to be released, if I was telling the truth. He told me that their senior was coming, and he told me to talk to him. If I were telling the truth, I was going to be released, sent to my family. I said fine.
I: And then?
R: When their senior came, I talked to him, but he told me that I was lying.
I: He understood that you were lying? Did the commander tell you that?
R: Yes. Another ISIS member with authority came and told me that he wants to buy me and all my cousins, and he was going to rescue us. I refused to go with him. And he told me if I refuse, we will be sold to different people. I still refused. Then he left. I talked to the guard, I told him to set me free. He told me that there was an examination, and if I turn out to be a virgin as a result of this examination, they were going to kill me.
I: To understand if you’re lying or not?
R: Yes
I: Continue…
R: Death didn’t matter, really. I mean, I wanted to die. Death was good, if I was going to be saved from their hands. So, I told them I was married. Next day, two ISIS members came. One of them did not look like an Arab. You could say that he’s a foreigner, he was coming from another country when you see him. The guard told me, my cousin and 2 other Yazidi girls that they were going to sell us to them.
I: Continue…
R: Then, tjhey wrote down the names of the buyers. The guard told their senior he should know that I was married, and my husband became a Muslim. And the person who was buying me didn’t liked it, and asked why. My buyer told their senior to stop and check the name list. The senior had a book, in which all the names of those who became Muslim were written. I told him that I was married. The senior told me that I would end up worse than the others if I was lying. I said okay. He asked me the name of my husband. I gave them the name of my cousin who became a Muslim. He told me that he can tell a liar from the look in their eyes. I said fine. He found my cousin’s name in the book. He said okay, I was being released. They took me back, and didn’t sell me. I stayed there for 2 more days.
I: Where?
R: Umm. At the place we slept. I stayed there for 5 more days. When buyers came, they were telling them that I was not for sale.
I: Where did you go after 5 days?
R: Their senior who found the name of my cousin told me that they were going to send me to him. We went to a school, but we didn’t see anyone there. It was in a village where Yazidi families and children lived.
I: They were living there?
R: Yes
I: What was the name of the village?
R: Qasr al-Mihrab
I: You went there and met with your cousin?
R: I saw my brother, and my cousin. I told them that he was my brother, and they said okay. They asked my brother where my children were, where our house was. My brother realized the situation and told them that they cannot go to our house by car, there was no road. They said okay, we have other things to do, and your sister should stay with you. They told my brother that they needed to take me to my husband, and he should do that instead. My brother said okay. For some time I stayed with my cousin and uncle.
I: For how long?
R: Around five months.
I: And then?
R: Then they took all of us from that village to Mosul.
I: How long did you stay in Mosul?
R: Around 20 days. Then ISIS came again and told us that they were collecting unmarried girls. My uncle’s wife told them that I was not her son’s wife. So ISIS took me, too.
I: Your uncle’s wife said that?
R: (…)
I: Why did she do so?
R: (…)
I: Okay. Where did you go then? Where did ISIS take you?
R: We went to a court.
I: Where was it?
R: In Mosul.
I: So, you stayed in Mosul.
R: Yes, I was there for 5 days, and then a commander bought me.
I: After that?
R: You know the rest.
I: Could you escape soon, or you were bought?
R: They sold me to Syria again.
I: Ah you went to Syria. And then?
R: Then the army came to my help, and rescued me.
I: Which army?
R: American troops.
I: Did the American army rescue you?
R: …
I: You don’t want to talk?
R: No, I don’t.
I: How long did you stay in the hands of ISIS?
R: 9 months.
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape? VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin? VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being? H01 chiqes pisbune daishe ( ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend? H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: The difficulties you have experienced, did it affect your health? Did your experience affect your physical well-being? Or it didn’t?
R: Honestly, what can I say? We were in too difficult conditions. We had to drink a lot of contaminated water. Still my stomach is not fine.
I: I see. From 0 to 4, how much has your health detoriated?
R: 2
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being? H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê chu saxbuna we bedilend? H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced? H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine? H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
I: Now I’ll ask you and you’ll tll us how much you have it.
R: Okay 
H04 Pain H04 Êş (eshek) H04 Schmerz
I: Pain?
R: What kind of a pain?
I: Do you have any pain on your body?
R: I have constant headaches.
I: You don’t have any pain other than your headaches?
R: No I don’t, but how can I say that? I often have trouble standing up.
I: Do you feel a weight on you?
R: Yes.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause) H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you feel sensitive?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: Not so much, what can I say? Half…
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties) H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi) H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you feel your body heavy when you are walking?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Not so much.
I: 2?
R: Yes.
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling) H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be herzin/dejerfen H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you feel out of mind, do you feel feeble?
R: Sorry, I can’t understand?
I: It’s my bad. Do you lose consciousness? Do you feel bad and fall down?
R: What can I say? I don’t fall down, but I often feel heavy on my head. I cannot lift my head up.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder) H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Are your eyes, ears good?
R: What can I say, not that good.
I: How bad? Too bad, or somewhat bad?
R: Somewhat bad.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing) H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel short of breath?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Sometimes.
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance) H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte wekî dinya li dora we digere H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you feel dizzy?
R: (…)
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats) H11 dle ta deshe H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Do you have heart problems?
R: Many times, when I feel troubled, I feel my heart is having difficulty.
I: How much do you feel that?
R: Rarely.
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea) H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Do you have stomach aches, do you feel like womitting?
R: 3
H13 Do you have any other symptoms? H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)? H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group Group 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned? H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn? H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
I: You said you have severe headaches?
R: Yes
I: How is it? Do you have it every day?
R: What can I say? It’s too much, so many times.
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine? H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
I: Do you have any problems other than your headaches?
R: No
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any? H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye? H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health? H18 Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin? H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: Do you think that your headaches and shortness of breath are related to your experiences?
R: Yes
I: Where do they come from?
R: Honestly, when I feel bad, I don’t want to talk to anyone. I want to be left alone. Many times when I see the news on Facebook, I feel bad, I have nightmares.
I: Are they because of the fear you experienced with ISIS?
R: Yes
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health: H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir? H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence) H20 Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel) H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Do you think your headaches and other problems affect your psychological health? I mean, when you think about it, is it about your psychology?
R: What I lived through under ISIS?
I: When you think about them, does your psychology (…)?
R: Honestly, it’s very hard.
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction) H21 lashe ta, misal (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you have sickness on your body?
R: Yes, I feel sick.
I: Is it too much?
R: Yes
I: How much? Can you tell?
R: 3
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms) H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi) H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins) H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Do you think what happened to you has religious reasons? That God is doing this to you, God is punishing you? Or it doesn’t have anything to do with God?
R: No, I don’t believe in that.
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people? H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye navbera we u milete kiri? H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: Has your experiences affected your relationships with people?
R: My experiences as a captive in the hands of ISIS?
I: Yes. Do you feel distant from other people? Or are you like you used to be, and it didn’t change you?
R: I am like I used to be.
I: Like you used to be. So, not much changed? Your relationships with people are still like how they were before?
R: Yes.
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community? H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye? H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: Did you experience affect your relationships with Yazidis? Did it affect that or not?
R: No.
I: It didn’t affect?
R: No.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion? H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî? H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: Do you feel away from the Yazidi community?
R: No.
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith? H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we? H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: Did you experience with ISIS affect your faith? Is your faith lessened?
R: No
I: Is it like it used to be?
R: Yes, it’s.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith? H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari) we ji bo diyanet yizidi? H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence? H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî? H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: What do you do to forget about your experiences? What do you do for yourself? How do you spend your time?
R: Honestly, I don’t have any time after school. I go to school for 8 hours a day.
I: So, you don’t have any time?
R: No, honestly the school is hard this year.
I: But it’s good for you, right?
R: Yes, this year it’s (German)
I: Ah I see, you are doing (German). Do you take medication for your headache?
R: I used to, the people in charge gave me pills. But now I don’t. (Arabic)
I: (Arabic)
R: Yes
I: For your headache?
R: Yes
H30 What can you do for symptom relief? H30 çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)? H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence? H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê : H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family) H32 te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet) H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: Now I’ll ask you more questions. When a person goes through such grief, if their family, relatives stand by them, they feel stronger. Do you believe that?
R: If I have a problem?
I: It can be a problem, it can be a bad experience. About what you’ve been through. When people, your family, your relatives, all of them stand with you, do you feel that would help you?
R: Of course
I: How much?
R: What can I say? 4
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength) H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî) H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe in yourself?
R: My belief is 4.
H34 Praying H34 limê kirin H34 Beten
I: Do you pray? Do you invoke to God? (Arabic)
R: Yes, I believe in God
I: Very much?
R: Yes, very much.
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone) H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Do you like spending time alone, without anyone, by yourself?
R: …
I: How much?
R: 3.
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS) H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we) H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Do you try to stay away from things that remind you of your experiences? Don’t you want to see, hear them?
R: Not so much. I’ve been through a lot. I want to move on. I cannot keep myself away from them. But I don’t want to go back to the beginning.
I: I see. So, let’s say no? You don’t do that
R: No
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Do you want to talk to others about your experiences?
R: No.
I: You want to keep it in?
R: Sometimes.
I: How much?
R: 1
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists) H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst) H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Don’t you want to go to a psychologist?
R: No
I: How much?
R: 2 
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community H39 alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Do you want the Yazidi community to help you? How much?
R: 4.
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope? H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe. H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Is there anything else that you do to make your psychology better?
R: Shall I allow myself?
I: Yes, I see. Is there anything else you want to add?
R: …
Group Group 
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you? H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike? H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being. H45 Niha ezê navê reya bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
I: Now I’m going to ask them if you do the things that I’ll ask.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood) H46 îlaç (derman) H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Do you use psychological medication?
R: No
I: Do you know what’s psychological medication?
R: Yes
I: And you don’t use them?
R: No.
H47 Psychologists H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi) H47 Psychologen
I: Have you been to a psychologist?
R: Yes
H48 Individual psychotherapy H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Did you go there alone, or as a group?
R: By myself.
H49 Group psychotherapy H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari) H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Have you been to a… umm.. I don’t know how it’s called… For example, there are churches, there are mosques for Muslims, and for you, is it Lalesh?
R: Yes
I: Have you been to Lalesh for yourself?
R: To Lalesh?
I: Yes, it can be Lalesh (Arabic) People go there for their experiences.
R: Yes
I: Have you been there?
R: Yes, many times I’ve been there.
H51 Herbal medicine H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati) H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Have you ever used herbal medicine?
R: How so?
I: Like tea, but not tea. Natural remedies…
R: No.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare) H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan) H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Do you have social? Is there a social who helps you? Do you go to them or do they come to you?
R: Here?
I: Yes, here
R: Yes.
I: So, you have social.
R: Yes 
H53 Doctor or physician H53 toxter? H53 Ärzte
I: Do you have a regular doctor? (German)
R: Yes, we have (German)
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help? H54 Toxter: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Does the doctor help you? Is it good? Do they understand you when you go to them?
R: Yes
I: I’m not talking about a psychologist, it’s (Arabic) doctor.
R: Yes.
I: How much do they help?
R: 3
H55 If medication: how much did it help? H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help? H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: When you went to a psychologist, how much did it help? Was it good?
R: Yes, very good.
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help? H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: You were alone when you talked?
R: Yes
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help? H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help? H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: Did you feel better when you went to Lalesh?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: 4, very much.
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help? H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help? H61 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir? H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much does social help you?
R: Honestly, they are so nice to me.
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being? H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike? H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
I: Apart from these, we talked about doctor, psychologist, and social. How much do they help you? (Arabic) they help you?
R: Honestly here, in Germany… I have so many friends in Iraq. I went to (Arabic) for a month. One month (Arabic). I worked as a (Arabic).
I: In Iraq?
R: Yes. If I could go to Iraq for a visit, all of them want to see me. They do not see me as a captive of ISIS. They help me a lot. I worked at (Arabic) for a month. They were Americans. For two months they paid me and my sister salaries. I also went to Yazda. For a month it was training. I also took 5 papers I guess.
I: So, they helped you?
R: Yes
I: What about here (Arabic) How do you feel?
R: We, Yazidis have problems here, too. What happened to us is unbearable. But if I make new friends in here, other Yazidis misunderstand. If I become friends with Muslims or Christians, they say it’s not right, we should stay as Yazidis.
I: So, they say don’t get out of the Yazidi community?
R: Yes.
I: How well did you feel when you went to the psychologist? Did you feel that your psychology got better?
R: My psychology got better.
I: Why was that?
R: Honestly, it’s not only about me. For example, I can face a new problem. If I feel bothered, I can talk to them. And they’ll tell me what the better thing would be to do. We say (Arabic), just like that.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet? H64 Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye? H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Apart from psychologist, (Arabic) doctor and social, do you need anyone else to help you? Do you need anything else? They call it (Arabic).
R: What can I say? It’s important that I speak the language well. My problem is, I cannot walk together with a German person.
I: What? I don’t understand?
R: I am learning their language and I want to be friends with German people.
I: Why don’t you do that?
R: There was a German who worked as (Arabic). He knew the people responsible from us. The responsible people were saying that’s good for my language skills. I was with them for a month. They call it (German).
I: Yes, (German)
R: Yes, I was doing that. But other Yazidis here were telling me that I like him, this and that. Now we don’t talk to each other anymore. Problems like that…
I: Was that German person a man?
R: Yes
I: How did you make the (German)?
R: It was iron.
I: What was it in German?
R: Umm. Metal.
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: Since the last week. Umm. Can I speak Arabic?
R: Okay.
I: (Arabic)
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu) H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble sleeping? I mean during your sleep, not before sleeping. Do you have trouble? Do you wake up often from your sleep? How much?
R: …
H68 Other things kept making me think about it H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Are there things that force you to constantly think? Do you think involuntarily?
R: No.
H69 I felt irritable and angry H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: Do you think you are angry?
R: (Laughs) Sometimes. Now, I feel comfortable.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist. H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: Do you try to be not upset? Do you feel not upset when you think about it?
R: (Laughs) Yes.
I: How much?
R: Half. Not much.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Do you think even if you don’t want to?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: 2
I: 2?
R: Yes.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Do you feel that what happened wasn’t real, but a dream? Do you ever say to yourself that it was a dream?
R: Umm. I…
I: No?
R: …
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist. H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you try to stay away from what comes to your mind about your experiences? Do you try not to think about what had happened?
R: …
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind H74 suret e ten sari ta H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do you see bad pictures in front of your eyes when you shut your eyes?
R: Sometimes
I: How much?
R: 1.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: Do you quiver out of nowhere? Do you quiver with fear? Do you shudder while you are just sitting?
R: Sometimes, rarely.
I: A little?
R: Yes 
H76 I tried not to think about it H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim. H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try to never think about it again?
R: No
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie. H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: Do you realize what comes to your mind and say “I’m not afraid, I’m not upset” for them?
R: Sometimes… Well, no.
I: Don’t you do that?
R: No.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder) H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Do you feel numb?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Not so much
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir. H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Do you feel as if you were there?
R: …
H80 I had trouble falling asleep H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir. H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: Do you have trouble sleeping? Not during sleep, before falling asleep.
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: Umm…
I: 2?
R: Yes.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Do you feel as if your feelings hit you like strong waves?
R: Yes
I: How much?
R: That’s also half.
I: 2?
R: Yes.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim. H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you try to take them completely out of your mind?
R: Yes, but it doesn’t help.
I: It doesn’t help, but you try, right? How much do you try?
R: Really, not much (laughs)
I: (Laughs)
H83 I had trouble concentrating H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir. H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Do you have attention issues?
R: No.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: When you are thinking about it, do you sweat, feel suffocated, dizzy, nauseated?
R: Yes, but not much, half.
I: 2?
R: Yes
H85 I had dreams about it H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît. H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you have nightmares?
R: Yes, but not much. 1.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir. H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you feel too much aware?
R: How?
I: You look around, and feel afraid?
R: Half
I: 2?
R: …
H87 I tried not to talk about it H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim. H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Do you try not to talk about what happened?
R: No.
H88 Thank you for these responses. H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I: Thank you very much. There are some questions left, it’ll be over soon.
R: (Laughs)
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany? H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne? H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Can you tell me what was the best experience you had in Germany? What was the best thing that happened to you?
R: After I came here?
I: Yes
R: Umm…
I: I know you miss your family, but I want to know what’s the best thing you’ve experienced here.
R: Honestly, it’s the school. It makes me feel so good.
I: You are happy to be in school, to go there?
R: Yes
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time? H90 tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu? H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: How pleased are you with this project in Germany for Yazidi women?
R: To be honest, I am pleased, but not so much.
I: How much?
R: (Laughs)
I: What you’re saying is important. Why aren’t you pleased?
R: Honestly, so many others who came here have better places than us. They are in the city. They can go out. They can learn the language much better than us. We are not in the city, and after school, I cannot practice my language skills. But if I could go out to get some food, I could have learned much better. Our 2 off-days are not enough for that. Here we only have the bus to school. We can’t go anywhere.
I: Do you only have the school bus here?
R: Yes. If there’re courses at school, there’s a bus. Otherwise, there’re no buses.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion? H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota? H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Okay, I see. What about positive things in this project? We have written down your negative thoughts. What is there that’s good?
R: Socials are so nice to us. They take good care of us. Whenever we have a problem, socials run to our help. Working is not compulsory. When I’m going to school, I don’t have to work. Also, the government provides for my expenses.
I: If you were to thank for this project, what would you thank for?
R: I would thank them for bringing me here. For providing us things we could never see in Iraq. If things improve and we return to Iraq, we will see how good it was.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion? H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota? H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
H93 And what gives you hope for the future? H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)? H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: Last question: What gives you hope in life? Where do you get your hope from?
R: Umm… My hope… What can I say? I have hope that my family will return to me one day. I really hope, I always expect to hear it. I never could appreciate my mother, my father, my brothers and sisters… They went through so much hardships to raise me up, to send me to school, and I never appreciated it. I couldn’t think how hard it was for my mother, just to give birth to me. I want to reunite with them and appreciate their toils, repay them even if it’s only half of what they did for me.