FILE: 082teil2
I: You had talked to us about all your situation. So how much harm have you experienced when you were in their hands? Yes or no? What harm has it inflicted on you?
R: Harm? You all know that every girl has been hurt. Since l arrived here, l think continously. It is known what ISIS did to me. It’s been always hard for us.
I: Do you have any pain in your body? Your back, your leg?
R: No, l don’t have any pain in my body but because they broke my head for many times, it hurts most of the time.
I: How severe is your headache?
R: Not too much. I don’t have a headache continously.
I: And how is your thinking bothering you? How is your mental health?
R: It’s very hard.
I: Does your body sometimes itch or get numb after you’ve escaped from ISIS?
R: Before coming to Germany, my body’d been hurt. My legs were aching from walking too much. My body doesn’t itch.
I: Do you have difficulty in walking?
R: Some kind of tread’s been made for my shoes and when l put it into my shoes, l can have a long walk.
I: That’s because you fell into their hands?
R: Yes, when l escaped l walked for 4-5 nights. I was walking with fear.
I: How severe has your foot sole hurt?
R: It’s hurt too much. Without that tread, l can’t walk.
I: Do you feel dizzy or do you ever fall?
R: l feel dizzy so often when l stand up. When l was in Kocho, l never used to fall. But falling into ISIS’ hands, for many times l used to fall. But after coming here, l’m fine.
I: And on these days? Do you feel like that?
R: I always feel dizzy but not fall.
I: To what extent?
R: Very much.
I: Since you escaped from them do you have problem in seeing, hearing or do you have shortness of breath?
R: I don’t have problem with hearing but l have shortness of breath.
I: Do you have problem in breathing?
R: Yes, when l climb up stairs, l feel like l’m out of breath. I say ‘I can not even walk in this age.’ Yes, too much.
I: Do you feel dizzy?
R: When l’m on my period(regl), l feel dizzy. But except for it, l’m fine.
I: With your heart?
R: If l’m saddened, l feel pain in my heart.
I: To what degree?
R: If l’m saddened, it hurts very much.
I: Do you have stomach ache?
R: l don’t have any abdominal pain but most of the time l suffer from stomach ache. I have to eat continously or else it aches.
I: Why do you think that you have all these problems?
R: Because of getting distressed and l’m not well psychologically.
I: Why do you get distressed?
R: Because of the atrocities we’ve undergone, all my caretakers have gone(lost) in vain. If somebody kidnaps you, it cuts us to the quick. You don’t poke your nose into anybody’s business, you’re just home but some come and take you, that’s terrible.
I: These problems that you have, did you have them before falling in the hands of ISIS or they started after falling in ISIS’s hands?
R: I was in Kocho with my parents, two sisters and two brothers. I used to work continuously but l never had such pains. I had anemia. I never remember that l had such a pain in my body.
I: Do you think that all these incidents are a punishment from God?
R: I say it is by God’s will that l fell in their hands. Everythning is God’s will. Then l say ‘l had to undergo all these incidents.’
I: To what degree do you believe that they were God’s will?
R: Yes l usually say that they were God’s will. I fell into their hands but God didn’t say ‘Let them take. (The voice is cut)
I: Before falling into ISIS’ hands, your attitudes weren’t like now.
R: It’s changed very much.
I: What about your relation with the Ezidi community? Have your attitudes changed towards them?
R: Before falling into their hands, l didn’t used to talk ever but now l can not hide my annoyance if anybody says something, l attained an aggressive attitude.
My mum says to me ‘Your old tongue’s gone, now you have another one.’ My father was like that too. We were asking him ‘Why don’t you talk?’ and he was saying ‘l have nothing to say.’
I: Do you consider yourself a victim? Do Ezidis care for you more?
R: Since l escaped from ISIS, Ezidis don’t only care about me but also all the others that escaped from ISIS. They are very happy that we escaped, they come to visit us, they value us.
I: After undergoing these atrocities, has your belief got stronger or lost?
R: No, l’ll never abandon my faith. I believe that there is God, and my faith’s got stronger.
I: It’s got stronger more?
R: Yes when l was a child, l didn’t know what religion is but after hearing them that they calling us as ‘heretics’, l’m committed myself to my faith more than before. The faith isn’t made by humans, god has created it.
I: What do you do to get rid of all these problems? How do you bear?
R: When l get distressed so much, l cry and it makes me relieved. Or l go out. Sometimes lots of things come to my mind. Or sometimes l call my sister and mum or a friend.
I: Is there anything else that you do to relieve?
R: When l go to sleep, l feel so distressed, l cry and then l fall asleep.
I: We’ll give you some questions and you’ll answer, if you feel better or worse when you do that.
When you think about Ezidis, your mum or your family, do you feel better or worse?
R: l didn’t used to think about my mum before. But my brother thinks about her and says ‘Why doesn’t she come by me?’ so he makes me think about my mum as well.
I: Is it hard for you?
R: Yes it is hard when my brother is alone there and my mum is not with him. He has to reach her, she has to reach him. It is hard.
I: Do you believe in your strenth, in your will?
R: Yes l believe in my will ver much.
I: Do you pray?
R: Yes, when l wake up and when l go to sleep.
I: Does it help you? Is it good for you?
R: God’s will, it is good.
I: In what degree?
R: 4.
I: You’re happy when you are alone or when you’re with your brother?
R: If l get annoyed, l want to be alone. If not, l want to be with my brother. When l’m alone and feel good, l want my brother to be with me. If l get annoyed, l want the door to be locked and stay alone.
I: Is it good for you if you stay away those thoughts?
R: I want to forget but l can not.
I: To what extent?
R: Very much. I want to forget them as much as l can.
I: Is it good if you talk to your community or your friend?
R: It’s not always good. I want to know what is going on, l want to have some information but not always. We always talk about the same issues.
I: Is it good when you see a psychiatrist?
R: Not really. Talking to them opens another wound.
I: Does the Ezidi community help you when you need something?
R: They do whatever they can.
I: To what degree?
R: Always. Once l went to Iraq, they helped me. They always help each other.
I: Do you take psychological drugs?
R: No.
I: Herbal drugs?
R: l take nothing.
I: You told us that you began therapy. Did you see the doctor alone or with other people?
R: We all had it.
I: Was it benefecial?
R: Not really. It was a man so l was embarassed of telling him anything, l couldn’t.
I: When you go to Laleş or see a Shekh, do you feel better?
R: When l went there, l felt distressed very much, l cried. Because l was with my parents and my brother, l wasn’t alone.
I: Seeing a doctor is good or not?
R: I don’t go to see them that much. I have a problem with my eye, l can’t see well since l escaped. I go to see the doctor, it is good.
I: To what degree?
R: 3.
I: What about your social responsible?
R: It’s pretty good. They help me in translation.
I: In what respect do you say that they are good for you?
R: For example, when l go to see the doctor l don’t know how to tell him which part of me hurts and they help me in translation.
I: What else?
R: Let’s say when l need some money at school and if l can’t express mysellf because of the language, the social expert is called and they solve it.
I: Do you need any help that you’ll get better with it?
R: I just want my mum to reach my brother. I asked the Social but they told me ‘We have nothing to do.’
I: And what else?
R: Nobody can do anything.
I: 20 minutes later we’ll finish and we hope that you have still time.
R: l have time, no worry.
I: We’ll ask you some questions and you’ll answer if these questions from now to 7 days ago has ever happened to you or not?
When you think about those problems, does your life turn into the old life?
R: Yes, sometimes l feel like that.
I: do you have difficulty in sleeping.
R: It is too difficult for me to fall asleep. I don’t even want to go to sleep.
I: Those atrocities that you’ve undergone, do they always come to your mind?
R: Not continously.
I: To what degree?
R: Moderate. It’s been 3 years and there are lots of things that l think about, not only that. Sometimes l think when l am in school.
I: A while ago you said that you get annoyed sometimes, so in what degree; from 0 to 4?
R: 3.
I: When all those things come to your mind, don’t you want to be annoyed, right?
R: No, l don’t want to get saddened.
I: To what degree?
R: Ever. But l can’t help.
I: So you don’t want to think about them but they come to your mind?
R: Yes. Sometimes l feel sick of them but l can’t help.
I: To what degree?
R: I don’t want to think about them ever but they come to my mind.
I: Do you ever feel that all you’ve lived is just a dream?
R: I think like why did all these things happen to me and l say if it was a dream then it wouldn’t be for 3 years.
I: To what degree?
R: 2.
I: Do you want to get rid of these thoughts?
R: Yes l do.
I: Do you feel that those incidents come as an image in front your eyes?
R: When l go to the town, sometimes some people reminds me of ISIS.
I: To what degree?
R: 3.
I: At nights, do you ever get up suddenly?
R: Yes l do.
I: Don’t you want to think?
R: No l don’t.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, do you care about them or do you just say ‘I don’t mind them’?
R: When l get too distressed, l ask myself ‘Why do l get so stressed?’
I: Do you ever feel like a dead person when those incidents come to your mind?
R: I didn’t get it. Yes sometimes l feel like that, it’s been always sorrow. Even if there is happines we just stay at home.
I: Do you ever feel that you’re still in your hands?
R: When l listen to some songs, l feel grieved and feel like that.
I: What kind of songs?
R: Arabic songs.
I: To what degree?
R: 2. …37:43
I: Is there some days that you can not sleep?
R: Some days l can’t sleep well but some days l sleep well.
I: When you go to sleep, do you fall asleep early or does it take time?
R: It isn’t always the same.
I: In 7 days?
R: This week l was working, l didn’t sleep well for 3 days.
I: Do you sometimes feel hard pressed because of these atrocities?
R: Yes, very much.
I: Do you want to get rid of all those thoughts?
R: I want to forget all those atrocities but don’t want to forget my caretakers.
I: To what degree? 3? 4?
R: When l feel distressed, l want to forget them. (Here the interpretor says 3 though the respondent doens’t utter it. Actually for lots of times the interpretor does so. Even sometimes there is no relation with what the respondent says)
I: Do you have difficulty in concentration?
R: l was totaly unconcious today. I went to the Conto but l couldn’t remember my password (l think she wants to mean bank account by ‘Conto’). l left half of my stuff there and came.
I: To what extent?
R: Today it was totally.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, do you sweat or are you afraid?
R: I sweat.
I: To what degree?
R: Not too much, 3.
I: Do you dream?
R: No. I would like to dream of my caretakers but l don’t dream.
I: Are you aware of yourself more than before?
R: When l go out at night. 
I: Don’t you want to talk to anybody about these incidents?
R: I want to stay away from talking to anybody.
I: What are the good points of Germany that you’ve experienced?
R: Here we are in secure, l am not afraid.
I: What else?
R: In Iraq, we were always staying at home. It was not like here.
I: What do you think about this project that you’ve been taken to here Germany?
R: You know what l think; … 44:26 the women that have family weren’t taken to here except for the women themselves and children, that’s so difficult. For example, my mum and my underage sister are there, we both were taken to here. They both escaped from ISIS, they haven’t been taken to here. That’s so hard, what can we both do here alone?
It wasn’t bad but it wasn’t good either.
I: To what degree?
R: 3.
I: What are the 3 good points of here?
R: In Iraq, we were staying in tents but here we are staying in houses. …46:02 and we aren’t afraid.
I: And the negative ones?
R: Here we are put into the same house with the people we don’t know, why don’t you put us with our cousins?
I: What do you hope for the future?
R: To reach my family.