Instructions for using this template
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German.
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English.
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you?
R: I am 42.
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text.
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response.
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion.
Audio file name: [Each file name has a number. Please put the number here]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
“I” Are you 26 years old ?
“R”  Yes, I’m 26 years old .
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
“I” Are you single or married ?
“R” I’m single .
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
“I” How many people of your family are living with you here ?
“R” me, my brother and three girls .
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
“I” Who are they ?
“R”  I live with my brother at a house, and my uncle’s daughter in law with her two daughters live at another .
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
“I” Can you read and write in any language Arabic, Kurdish …?
“R”  I can write in Arabic and Kurdish, but not very well .
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
“I” Did you go to school in Iraq ?
“R” I finished six grade, I didn’t go regularly .
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
“I” And now are attending any language course or anything else ?
“R” Yes, I go to language courses .
I couldn't understand the question, They spoke in German.
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
“I” Are you working now ?
“R” No, I’m not .
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
“I” Why?
“R” I did (German name of an exam ) and get good results .
The respond told them about good results
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I In Iraq did you work?
R No, only house chores .
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
“I” What is your religion ?
“R” Yazidi .
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
“I” Which ethnic group do you belong to, Arabs, Yazidi ?
“R” I’m Yazidi .
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
“I” What are your hopes for the future ?
“R” Frankly i think of nothing, only to see my family again .
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
“I” What do you still need to rebuild your life,  you didn’t get it ?
“R” Actually if my family was with me here, i would have been more successful, i would have finished school and found a job, but since my family is away, i can do nothing with my life .
“I” Why ?
“R” Because i held the responsibilities of my family, my brother is still young, he’s only 14 years old, and my mother is alone.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
“I” Now we have some questions, your answers should be according to numbers of how much good or bad or half ? and you can add anything you want to ?
“R” Ok
“I” Do you feel independent and responsible for your life? or it’s under someone else control ?
“R” I control my life, but i can’t do anything for myself, because my brother is underage, because of him i can do nothing for me .
“I” Could you specify the number?
“R”  Yes, It’s not zero, a little bit more .
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
“I” What do you plan for your future ?
“R” I haven’t thought about it yet .
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
“I” Suppose the situation got better in Iraq, would you go back there, or go to Kurdistan, or stay in Germany, or go to another country ?
“R” If the situation improved in Iraq, I’d travel back there to reunion with my mother and sister, my little brother and me are feeling lonely without them , we all need each other, and if the situation didn’t get better, i hope they would be able to join us here .
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
“I” How much do you feel Germany as your home ?
“R” I don‘t feel Germany as my home at all, I’m still psychologically not settled yet.
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
“I” How long have you been living here, 2 years ? and how did you find your stay here, was it good or bad ?
“R” I’ve been living here for 2 years, and 2 months. life here is good but our hearts are not relieved .
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
“I” Why do you feel this way ?
“R” The German are good with us, and there is no fear here.
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
“I” If you want to return to Iraq or Kurdistan, what the things should exist there to make you feel safe and settled again?
“R” There must be international protection .
“I” Like what ?
“R”  troops to protect our regions should be based there to make us feel safe.
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
“I”  What does  the word justice mean to you ?
“R” Justice is like Human Rights organization ? , It means that the state must protect people’s rights , when some other persecute and fight Yazidi for their religion, they must know people that Yazidi didn’t create their religions as they wish, it’s chosen for us by God’s will, and these are our rights which they don’t respect.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How much important is it to you to have justice and to avenge of ISIS for bad things they done to you ?
“R” It’s very, very important for me to have justice .
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
“I” How much optimistic are you that you’ll get justice?
“R” After ISIS committed horrible crimes, killed women and girls, i’m not optimistic that i’ll ever get justice .
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” How much important is it for you that ISIS fighters should be held accountable for their actions ?
“R” It’s very important .
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
“I” Why ?
“R” Because i was peaceful living at my home working at farms breeding livestock, i done nothing wrong to anyone, nor worked in politics parties against others, to be damaged like this.
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” Do you think that all ISIS (leaders and fighters) must held equally accountable, or no?
“R” All ISIS are bad, one thing is  good about very few members of them, they let us call our family to hear their voices, and that’s it .
Here the interview was interrupted by a small Yazidi boy, and funny discussions happened and the respondent refers here to the German good and generous manners with them, but it’s irrelevant to the interview questions .
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
“I” And how do you think ISIS must be punished, jailing them, or sending them to Internationals courts?
“R” They must be punished with the same means ( torture and suffer ) they did to us .
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Have you heard before that’s some of ISIS fighters had been sent to courts ?
“R” Yes, i heard, but i don’t believe that it really happened .
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Can you forgive them ?
“R” No, I can’t .
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How much important is it for you to know what had happened to you during the conflict with ISIS ?
“R” It’s very important .
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I How important is it for you to let other people know what happened to you ?
R Yes, it’s very important as well, i want the whole world knows about it .
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
“I” How much important is it for you to let your grandchildren know about this crisis ?
“R” It’s important for them to not forget their fathers, but it’s not important for the young children to know about it, it’s very difficult for them to understand and adapt with it .
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
“I” If it’s difficult for children to understand then why do you want the whole world knows about it ?
“R” Because they have to find any possible way to eliminate this evil from the world, before it invades other countries .
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
“I” Which way shall be used to enlighten the world about it, by newspapers, meetings ….?
“R” With all the possible way newspapers, magazines, talks….
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
“I” Have you heard of truth commissions ?
“R” No, is it humanitarian ones? i never seen anyone else except you and other person came here !
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
“I” It’s group of 6 or 7 members who go to the incidents place and write down all the crimes happened there and investigating them , the Iraqi state is responsible for that, Is it good if the state investigate about what ISIS committed in your region ?
“R” Yes it’s very good, for avoiding any similar future disaster .
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
“I” There are alot of victims of different religions and ethnic, Christians, Shia…..some who were beheaded and some others are still captured by ISIS , what do you think of them?
“R” Who is still alive like us they are victims and captives , we suffered a lot, but it’s not a big problem as our anxiety and eagerness for seeing our families, that’s more important for us than thinking of ISIS.
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
“I” What should be done for ISIS captives ?
“R” They must get rights and be protected .
“I” What about other non Yazidi hostages who are still between ISIS hands?
“R” All the hostages who had been unfairly jailed and tortured they must get their full rights and preserving them .
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
“I” And do you consider yourself as ISIS victim, and what the society’s perspective of you, as a victim? they respect you ?
“R” When Germany welcomed us, the people here treated us better than other refugees , they cared about us, psychologists came and helped us a lot .
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
“I” How do you see yourself ?
“R”  When i deeply think of what happened to me, yes i find myself their victim, but the German on the contrary they don’t let me feel that .
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
“I” Do you believe that one day Iraq will be safe again ?
“R” No, I don’t believe so .
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
“I” What about other country like Syria, Afghanistan, Pakistan, will they get freedom and safety again ?
“R” No, Syria is worse than others .
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
“I” What should be done to build lasting peace there ?
“R” Europe and America should intervene to help to finish the war,  since the Arabs only bring troubles and wars .
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
“I” Do you know that there is military campaign against ISIS ?
“R” Yes, I’ve heard that Iraqi army (Hashed Al-Shaabi) and Peshmerga are fighting against them and a lot of Yazidi also joining them, but the difference between the Kurds, and Arabs is Kurds don’t kill their hostages .
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
“I” What should be done to protect Yazidi, and other minorities so they can live peacefully in Iraq ?
“R” the borders must be well fortified with troops to let Yazidi and others survive, otherwise,  among the Arabs they will be tricked again and fall in ISIS hands .
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
“I” Did you tell anyone about your story, how many times, everyday or every week ?
“R” Since i arrived here from my village (Khanka /Kurdistan) , i couldn’t talk about it to anyone, so i lost and forgot a lot about it, but i started to talk about it now with you and another one before .
The last words weren’t clear .
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
“I” Who did you share your story with ?
“R” Before 2 months i met few Yazidi 2 girls and man, i don’t remember where they came from.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
“I” Did you tell your friends and family about it ?
“R” One day i visited my uncle in Hamburg, he asked me to discuss it, but i couldn’t .
“I” Did you discuss it with a doctor or someone else in charge of your affairs ?
“R” Yes, one time i discuss it with an assistant who come here to help refugees .
German word refers to the organization that assistant work for .
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
“I” Did you talk about it to media or police ?
“R” Police came and asked for that, three girls did it, but i couldn’t .i joined the psychological sessions where generally each one recites whatever he wants, like what happened with him at the same day but it’s not particularly about ISIS .
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
“I” Did you write you story for example on Facebook or in book ?
“R” No, i didn’t, but in (Khanka/Kurdistan) we went to ( Genocide ) where they wrote all the survivors stories .
“I” And did you write it for yourself ?
“R” I tried many times on Whatsapp , but couldn't i always wiped them .
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
“I” Do you watch news about Iraq ?
“R” Yes, i always watch it on facebook .
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
“I” Why ?
“R” Because i want to know anything about my captive family by ISIS, and what ISIS is still doing .
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
“I” Do you seek news on TV or radio ?
“R” I don’t have TV at home, but i contact my sister .
“I” How do you contact her by Whatsapp? you don't call her ?
“R” No, i don’t call my family in Iraq, but i call my uncle here .
“I” Do you have facebook, Messenger, Viber and why ?
“R” Yes i have them all, my teacher asked me, why i have all of these apps , i told her because i feel bored .
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
“I” Now we need to know more about your captivity time, only if you feel ok to tell us about it in details (like how long you stayed in their captivity, when, where and who was there with you etc…),otherwise, if you can’t, then you can stop whenever you want, are you ok with that?
“R” Yes, I can tell you .
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
“I” Could you please tell us how did it start and what did happen ?
“R” In 03/08 ISIS broke into our region, but we kept calm hoping that they will get out soon, we were on our way to my uncle’s home out of our village, some people prevented us to pass saying that ISIS has came in, the Arabs from around our villages told us not to go out, because we did nothing wrong, and they won’t harm us, and Peshmerga told us that too before they left, and my uncle’s family were coming to our home. people told us when ISIS come in put a white flag on your homs( a sign of surrounding)so they won’t attack us, I was out of home wearing a cloak over me when i saw their vehicles coming in, i ran into home and told all that they were in our village, my big uncle attend their speech, then he came back to tell us that they won’t harm anyone only if we convert our religion into Islam , it started to be very difficult situation to live in, no electricity, nor food, nor water. After 2 days ISIS came back to order us to convert our religion, alot of us refused and started crying some preferred  to commit suicide on conversion . Arabs living around our villages joined ISIS and call us and Christians unbelievers . After their meeting they returned with their cars ordered us to come to the big school bringing all the money, gold, phones we had, i found huge crowd of people gathering at school, ISIS encircled us with their vehicles wherever we looked we saw their 2-3 vehicles , women, children, men all were crowded at (Kojo) school then ISIS started separating women and children should go to the upper floor, and men stayed on lower one. a lot of women among them mother and me refused to leave our men, well known man called ( Ahmed he was the mayor of the village ) brought the bags and ordered us to fill them with all the money we had, i had earrings and ring and my little sister earrings with 3 phones and a lot of money we put them in the bag, usually in Summer people have a lot of money . my 2 sisters, 2 cousins, mother we put on clocks and scarfs around our heads and eyes so ISIS couldn’t see us, and went to (Soulaj) institute where there were 2 parks , but ISIS took them off and set fire to them, had no food nor water, kids started crying till the evening . ISIS brought meals in big cookers took the kids to the upper floor to feed them, and took some girls to the other park on the other side , but i stayed with mother and little brother( i live with him now). At night we met a talking Kurdish man who we already knew and saw in the village , he forcibly collected boys and put them in a bus heading to (Tal-Afar) i resisted them and prevent them from taking brother, but they hit my head and put me with other girls in another bus heading to Mosul. first night we stayed at a big house of 3 floors, Next day my cousins, sisters and me put in the bus going to another one of 2 floors, we stayed there for 15 days, fighters only came in to bring us some food and left again, they didn’t let us to take showers. It’s a religious ritual for Yazidi to do not take showers on Wednesdays and on that day they came in to order us to take shower, i was more courageous and flexible and older than the other girls , so i said i will do it and said may God understand my difficult situation,  sympathy and forgive me , i went to shower with my 2 cousins,and 2 sisters , when we were out, girls were shock of us asked us how could you do that? i replied them if God see our shower is a real sin then he wouldn’t let that happen and put us in these difficulties, he should find a way to help and forgive us . ISIS came back to make sure we all took showers, so he forced other girls and sent them to the bathroom, afterwards all girls had to say the same thing i said from the beginning but we didn’t combed our hair . At night ISIS came into our rooms again made sure our hair was wet, and started looking carefully and selected 5 of my cousins, and few girls of my village, and put them in another room, one of my cousins cried and asked me to stay with her, i tried but ISIS stopped me and locked them in the room. next day they came back looking and picking, this time they chose my little sister , she cried a lot and ISIS were all over the rooms i crossed them and went to my sister we exchanged cloths and changed her hairstyle and i had a pen so i draw tattoo on her face so they won’t recognize her, they looked for her but couldn’t find her again .
“I” you were wearing her clothes so they took you instead of her ?
“R” No, they couldn’t recognise neither her nor me and left us. every night different fighters came in, one day a fighter came to write our names in a list but he didn’t write my little cousin name instead he ordered her to get downstairs where there was a kitchen i resisted him and asked him to take me with her, but should keep my little sister and another cousin there, so he accepted and we were deported again (with only my little cousin) to another home of 3 floors in (Kojo), it was surrounded with different ISIS fighters and 2 vehicles. we stayed there for a month. One night we cried a lot, a fighter came in asking why, we replied “you are burying us a live here, we can’t even talk to our families”, so he gave us phone to call them, families asked us where were we, we replied in Mosul, at that night i felt very sick, i had a tomackache i even throw up the water i drank, one day i fainted and took me to hospital where i begged the Doctor at hospital to diagnose my condition as i have a very serious problem he accepted that and asked the guard that i should be sent back to my mother . during my stay at that home some new ISIS came into our room to choose again the guard asked me to hide and my cousin under the bed so they won’t see us he said that because my cousin is still very young , they asked him about my young cousin he replied that he only had those so that time he helped us to survive ( not me). so i told the same guard that i have a serious problem to prevent other fighters to take me for themselves . until one day in ( Kojo) with another 3 girls we decided to escape, we stayed up late looking for doors and keys we stole the keys from the falling asleep guard but unfortunately couldn't open the door , next day we opened all gas bottles in the kitchen, when the guard came in immediately smelled the gas so rush into our room where we were waiting for him and hurried to beds pretending to sleep, he was angry and started yelling and asking  who did it then called 3 girls names (Soohad, Sabriyah Saleh,  Jihan, and Hazo) put them in another room and yelled at them that they were trying to kill him with gas , we planned before we would swear that we didn’t do it purposely maybe someone forgot it leaking, and whenever someone swear for them they believe her , he didn’t offer us food, anyway i couldn't eat . one day 3 girls asked me to run with them after they found the door was open, i couldn’t even walk out of the door, then we ran into a neighborhood house who immediately told ISIS about us, he jailed us again, and started beating the 3 girls, one of them got broken head, another one got broken leg, and another’s shoulder and didn’t give them food, afterwards they brought another new 6 girls from ( Jolak ) kept 2 of them for themselves, and said according to their law my cousin and me should be free, because we were sages, she was too young and i was sick, they deported us from (Mosul to Kojo) nothing was left in( Kojo) except 2 homes they turned them into prisons where they kept girls for themselves. after i fainted again and had been taken to ( Baaj hospital ) when i woke up someone talk to me in kurdish and told me i was in (Baaj hospital) i asked them to let me go they refused and told me i should do a blood test, i begged them not to do it, then they asked me where i wanted to go i replied to go back home, they took me there where i found nothing left and felt depressed, they didn’t want me to stop there and drove me to ( Kojo ) looking for my mother then from ( Kojo to Tal- Kasab ) there was a Yazidi village where i stayed for a long time . one day while we were trying to sleep upstairs with a girl from ( Soulaj ), my little cousin and a mute girl ( can’t speak ) i begged the guard to let me use his phone so i can call my family, he accepted and asked me not to give to the other girls, i asked why, he replied because i was sick . so i called my uncle and asked him about mother’s place uncle told that she is in ( Tal- Al Mahrab) after that and begged a well known leader called ( Abo Hamza ) to let me go to mother’s place he lied to me he said i would, but he didn’t . i started feeling very sick, i threw up the pills  so they gave me some injections to take them by myself because they wouldn't accept do it for me , after the injections my whole body became swollen so i went to ( Baaj hospital ) again where i met a speaking Kurdish girl after seeing me she started speaking Arabic, i asked her to take me to toilet where i pushed her in and locked the door on us and put my hands on her mouth, asked her to keep calm and was she Kurdish , she replied who i am to ask her .
“I”  Who was she ?
“R” She was a doctor wearing Hijab like Arabs, she told me that she would help me i asked how long should i wait, and if we couldn't make it could she tell the Dr that i’m sick to let me go, she refused saying that, so i said i’ll do it . the Doctor listened to me and asked where is my destination ,i replied him to ( Tal-Afar ) so he accepted and asked 2 of the guards to leave me at hospital because i was very sick, i was left alone in the room Dr asked me to go i was very afraid and only wanted to go out but couldn’t, so i was transported to ( Tal- Kasab ) where i lived in very bad condition dirty food and rooms . ISIS came to take my cousin instead of me i resisted him, so i hold her in my arms, didn’t let him take her so he let her go and came to push me to the wall and hit my head into the window 2-3 times i felt dizzy and fainted, then he took my cousin , a friend of me woke me up, washed my face and changed my clothes were all blood, then Dr came to treat my head wounds . one of ISIS fighter came to ask me what was my problem, i told him a fighter i didn’t remember his name broke my head, he asked why did i and my cousin came, i answered i was looking for my mother, he asked where was she , i replied she was in ( Tal- Afar ), then he drove me and the mute girl there on our way i noticed that he was heading to ( Baaj ) not to ( Tal- Afar ) he said he want to pass to the gas station, indeed he drove me to ( Kaser- Al Mahrab ) in ( Kazalkia ) we found 2 big houses one of them full of ISIS and the other full of hostages, i was sick kept throwing up all the way, he went to look for my mother, when she came and approached me, we couldn’t recognize each other, i could recognize my uncle’s daughter in law from her dress finally i joined mother after a month ISIS came back to take me to see a Dr because i kept throwing up blood all the time (inflammation ) at (Tal-Afar ) hospital i told Dr i had a fever too, so he prescribed me an injection had pills inside it instead of water and assured me to take it well otherwise i will be paralysed i said i did it many times before . One day mother, cousins, brother and some others we decided to flee, we put on black veils took some water, food and phones and got off , ISIS didn’t notice our absence yet, but because of the dogs barks they started searching around with their cars, we walked long ways till we encountered water we crossed it then we found a desert ( not like Germany ) after that there were a lot of sand lands we kept walking from 7pm to 6am, we lost our way where we arrived to ( Tal- Afar ) again,  but we walked out of there to Shingal (Sinjar), we had no bread no water left, kids were thirsty and started crying 2 women suggested to go to the nearest camp and bring some water , they went there and came back without water, there was a pregnant woman with us, she stand up and and started begging and praying God to send us a shepherd to help us, suddenly we found a shephard we asked him for water, he offered us water, bread and tomato kids couldn’t eat it because they got dried throats couldn’t chew it, the the shepherd asked us if  we were ISIS hostages then we should hide because 2 of them were coming closer, we hid ourselves, they  couldn’t find us. The shepherd took his sheep back home and asked us to wait for him to send his father and brother to help us. Indeed they came with a woman looking for us we asked the woman to put  veil on her head, we walked from night to the morning till we arrived to Yazidi people, who came to welcome us, my cousin was very sick she couldn’t walk anymore, we helped each other around 6am we arrived to Yazidi village we looked for the people who helped us and found them there where i had to stay in Sinjar mountains at their place ate and drink under tents , because the weather was cloudy and foggy we had to wait for the weather to get better, then a plane came and we all got on the plane and travelled to Kurdistan where my uncles was waiting for us at Kurdistan airport .
“I” How long did you stayed in captivity ?
“R” 2 months and half .
“I” We’ve finished thank you .
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
Group	Group
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?