Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [Each file name has a number. Please put the number here]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
“I” How old are you ?
“R” I’m 33 years old .
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
“I” are you married ?
“R” Yes, i’m .
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
“I” Where is your husband ?
“R” Since that day he is disappeared .
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
“I” How many people of your family are here ?
“R” I have a son, and 3 of my sisters in law live here without their parents .
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
“I” Do they live with you ?
“R” No, i live only with my son, they moved to another home .
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
“I” Can you read or write ?
“R” No, i can’t .
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
“I” What level did you finish at school ?
“R” Till 6th grade, the schools in Iraq weren’t good .
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
“I” Are you going to school for language courses now ? 
“R” No, i don’t go, a teacher come to my home .
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
“I” Do you plan to attend school ?
“R” Yes, i have to .
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
“I” Are you working now ?
“R” No, the person in charge of my affairs doesn’t accept that .
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
“I” Do you want to get a job ?
“R” I can’t speak Deutsch .
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
“I” Did you work in Iraq, other than your housework ? 
 “R” Yes, i worked in fields, breeding livestock and my housework .
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
“I” What is your religion ?
“R” It’s Yazidi .
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
“I” Which group of people are you, Arab, Kurd, Yazidi ?
“R” I’m Yazidi .
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
“I” What are your concerns and worries ?
“R” All my thoughts are about  my family and my husband who i still don’t where he is .
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
“I” What do you need to rebuild your life ?
“R” I can do nothing, i understand nothing of German, here  without a husband ,i live lonely with my son, i have a son and that’s all i have and left with now.
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
“I” Now we will ask you some questions, your answers should be according to numbers and how strong is it, if you want to add another answers, you can tell anything you want ?
“R” Ok .
“I” How much control do you have over your life, do you ask anyone else to do your things or you do whatever you want ?
“R” I have a brother he was the only one who was out of ISIS control, he works in Sulaymaniyah, i have another one who is living alone in a caravan for many years, he is the one i ask 
before doing anything .
“I” How much control do you have, do you do the things you want to ?
“R” Since my brother is away i can’t ask him, so after i do everything i tell my family i did .
“I” Then is it number 4 ?
“R” Yes. 
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
“I” What do you think of your future ?
“R” I don’t have a future, i’m always sad, preoccupied and worried about my family and the captives in Iraq, i know nothing now not here nor there, i won’t get a good life .
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
“I” Suppose the situation in Iraq improved would you go back there, or stay here, or go to another country ?
“R” Where would i go in Iraq there aren’t homes anymore all villages destroyed, i want to go back to my hometown, but it’s very difficult, so i have to stay  here .
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
“I” How did you see your life here in Germany ?
“R” It’s not bad nor very good, 
The respondent pointed to a number before her .
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
“I” After 2 years of living in Germany how do you judge your experience here, was it good or bad ?
“R” I’m preoccupied, wherever i go i won’t get peace of mind, i’m always thinking of the captives and and watching news, i can’t help without worrying about them.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
“I” Here you can walk around, Isn’t here better than living in camps in Iraq ?
“R” Yes the life is very difficult in Iraq,people have no jobs nor money, they live in camps under terrible conditions . 
“I” Then here is better than Iraq, right ?
“R” Yes . 
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
“I” What changes should be done in Iraq to make you feel safe there, you weren’t living at your own your villages, arabs live around your place, what should  be done, so no one be will able to attack you again ?
“R” To stop the war there, the  people who fled from ISIS are living in camps, under horrible conditions they have no hot water, nor electricity, 8 men share the same caravan .
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
“I” What does justice mean to you, like human rights, do you know that ?
“R” no 
“I” After all the bad things happened to you what comes to your mind when i mention the word justice ?
“R” After ISIS killed our men and mothers, and destroyed our life, we don’t want our rights to be lost we need them back .  
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist? 
“I” Is it important to you to get your rights back and ISIS be punished ?
“R” Yes, very important .
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
“I” Are you optimistic you would get justice ?
“R” No, i don’t believe i will get justice. number 0 .
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” Who were the responsible for the bad things happened to you, were they ISIS fighter or leaders those who should held accountable of the violations ?
“R” They all did bad things, they are all the same .
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
“I” How do you want them to get punished by hanging, shooting?
“R” They must experience the same horrible things they did to us and get punished with worse than that . 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Do you know anyone is defending your rights and asking to punish ISIS ?
“R” No, i didn’t hear of anyone doing that, only Genocide office helped us, we went there to do testimonies .
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Will you forgive those unjust of ISIS ?
“R” No, at all, i will never .
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How important is it to you to know what‘s happening during ISIS conflict ?
“R” It’s very important, i still have family between ISIS hands, except for my parents who were killed in the village, only the ones who went with me to Syria a 6 months baby was sent with me i don’t even know his mother,  i don’t know what happened with the other of my family 3-4 of my brother in law kids ISIS pulled them out of my hand don’t know where are they, while the war planes were hovering there, i don’t know if they are still alive or dead  .  
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
“I” Do you want the rest of the world know about what happened to you by ISIS ?
“R” Yes, i want them to know.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
“I” How much is it important to you to let your grandchildren know about it ?
“R” It’s very important, when ISIS invaded our village my son was 1 year and 3 months, now he 5 years old, he hasn’t forgot his father yet, he always looked at his photo and say i want to see my father . 
“I” How about you ?
“I” will never forget what ISIS did to me as much as i suffered. 4 of my family except for my uncles and aunts all the villagers are my relatives i don’t know where they are now, i can’t see any of them, only 4 men could flee and they got injured while they did . 
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
“I” Which way do you think would ensure that ISIS crimes will be announced and won’t be forgettable, by a book or media ?
“R” With all possible ways .
“I” Like what way ?
It must be published in many countries, people like me did the interview and recited what happened to us to the government  , i did it for 3 times .
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
“I” Have you heard about truth or justice commission ?
“R” No, i don’t know it .
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
“I” It’s a group of expert people who investigate and make sure of how specific crimes had been committed, then writing down everything they discovered, Do you think Iraq government should send group of those to write about ISIS crimes from when to when happened and all detail of their that crimes ?
“R” Yes, i want, even me i went to a state office here to do the testimony and told everything i knew and happened to me , i shewed them 3 photos of ISIS i had, yes i want the government know all about it . 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
“I” What do you think should be done to help all ISIS captives not only Yazidi ( there are alot oof cptives from other people )?
“R Yes, not only Yazidi,  there are alot of captives are still between ISIS hands, they must be released . 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
“I” What about you and other Yazidi women, how do you need to be helped ?
“R” Actually i came here only with my son, i have no man  to support me or help me here, i understand nothing of the people or the processes .
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
“I” Do you see yourself as ISIS victim ?
“R” Yes, of course, i’m totally destroyed .
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
“I” Why ?
“R” I will tell you know my story and you will know why . only my son and me had survived i had no one left only my brother there . 
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
“I” Do you think Iraq situation will improve and get lasting peace ?
“R” No, i don’t believe it will ever be over .
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
“I” What about the other countries, like Syria ..?
“R” Actually i can’t understand their policy they are always on disputes and wars .
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
“I” In your opinion what should be done in Iraq to stop the lasting war, and be safe ?
“R” Actually the authorities are not paying attention to what had happened to Yazidi in Sinjar, i think Iraqi army ( Hashed Al Shaabi ) and Peshmerga  should united to stop the war so situation would improve . but i don’t know .
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
“I” What do you think should be done to stop war there, since Saddam fell till now the war  hasn’t stop yet, who can help to end it ?
“R” I think a strong,and a united government and army should appear and be strong enough to stop all disputes . 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
“I” Before long time Yazidi were living in peace no one approached or attacked them, what should be done to protect Yazidi?
“R” Yazidi were living safe, practicing their own religion at their villages never approached anyone and were satisfied with the calm life they had, then all Arabs around us turned into deceivers and betrayed us and sold us out to ISIS . 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
“I” Since you arrived here, how many times did you discuss your experience ?
“R” We always talk about it .
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
“I” Who did you discuss it with ?
“R” Have few cousins whose parents and families are lost, and with relatives here, we have no topic other than ISIS . 
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist? 
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
“I” Who else did you discuss it with? with a physiological or an administrator ?
“R” Psychologists come here to ask us do i sleep well, do i have dreams,other details ...
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
“I” Did you tell the administrator about it ?
“R” Yes, she know the whole stories .
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
“I” Did you tell the Media, TV about it ?
“R” One time, only with  a woman called Lowiza who came here to make a film i told her about it, but not to TV .
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
“I” Did you talk to the police bout it ?
“R” Yes, they came here and and asked us , there was a Kurdish interpreter, so they got all the our answers .
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
“I” After you did the testimony, did they tell you anything about it ?
“R” No, they only got our answers and didn’t say anything .
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
“I” Has the police called you again after the testimony ?
“R” No never heard of them since then .
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
“I” Since you arrived Germany have you written you story somewhere ? did you post it on Facebook ?
“R” No, i don’t use it .
“I” Or you wrote like a book ?
“R” No, i didn’t, only the administrators did, but not me .
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
“I” And since you arrived here how often do you seek news, everyday or what ? 
“R” Actually i don’t watch news, but i call my family in Iraq, and they call me, everyday .
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
“I” Why do you seek information ?
“R” To know what happened to the captives, and  what’s new . 
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
“I” Do you watch TV to seek information?
“R” No, there is no Iraqi channel .
“I” Do you listen to the radio ?
“R” No .
“I” do you read newspapers ?
“R” No, i can’t read. 
“I” Do you have Facebook ?
“R” No, i don’t .
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
“I” How do you communicate with your family ?
“R” I use whatsapp .
“I” Do you SMS ?
No i only use whatsapp for all my calls .
“R” Do you have Facebook messenger ?
“R” No.
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
“I” Now we arrived to your story part after that we will ask about your physical and psychological health, for your story we have no questions? you can say whatever you feel ok to say,otherwise, we will not force you to tell us anything you won’t be able to do, and if you want to take a break, tell us to stop, ok ?
“R” Ok.
“I” You can start .
“R” On 03/08 We were working in the fields of our village (Kojo) when ISIS broke in, some people got caught while they were trying to flee, they came to the talk (Ahmed Jehazo) the mayor of our village to tell us that they won’t harmed us, one afternoon before we had our lunch (Abou Hamzah) ISIS leader ordered us to go and take all the money, gold, phones we had and put them in their bags . in cars we went to the school where they took the men in cars after that we heard sound of shooting, they sent back 3 boys (who they already took with the other men), we asked the boys what was happening, they said they are shooting men in deep holes in the ground, then we got on our village cars and headed to (Soulaj), they took our scarfs off and put another on our heads, we were with old women stayed there one night at night they brought food and ordered the women with kids to go upstairs to feed their kids, we went up there was no enough water, we gave it to the kids, same night while we were lying in floor it was too hot they came in and took all girls and children, next day in the morning like now they came back and took all old women, then we heard shooting sounds they told us that old women were killed too, afterwards we go on the buses and went to (Tal-Afar) school we found the people who were caught from Sinjar there too, in very terrible conditions we stayed there for 16 days, children got sick and throw up and had diarrhea because of the hot weather and polluted food and water, we were very thirsty we had to drink yellow dirty water from toilet rusty tanks, every now and then ISIS came back choosed and forcibly took the women they liked, there were 2 villages of (Tal-Afer). Some of the men who accepted to convert their religion into Islam, came to took their women joined together and stayed in (Kaser-Al Mehrab) village, other women like me who had no husbands, they transported us by buses to the other village (Kazelkia). 2 months we stayed at that village school,under pretext of checking up they came in to pick the women they liked, it was too hot, we were 40 women at the same room. we cooked the remain expired food left in the shops on firewood to feed the children . we heard a family from my village got caught while they were trying to escape, they were badly tortured by ISIS and were jailed at ISIS checkpoint building for a week , One day Kalifa came by, so they ordered us to gather at school for checking, they came in, deployed into our crowd and started picking girls, they took my niece 12 years old she took her 6 months old sister with her to pretend that was her daughter, so they won’t marry her, ISIS took another 7 girls each girl took a baby too, to pretend the same, a woman who lately (1 month ago) gave birth to her new baby, she couldn’t walk yet ISIS took her too, since that neither my nieces, nor that women nor other girls haven’t appeared yet, don’t what happened to them, that was very difficult day we cried a lot, my sister got sick after her daughter's’ disappearance . After a few days, they gathered us again at a building they left the old women, and transported us to Raqqa, Syria where we found some of our people arrived before us to that farm in a forest, they didn’t give us food, there was no food or water, it was tight place for our huge number we couldn’t all sleep at the same time some has to stand up and wait till his turn came . It was very cold children were barefooted and without cloths. Then they wrote our names and each woman number of kids she had, everyday in morning at night, in no specific time one fighter came and called to take her for himself, one night at 1 am while i was lying on floor with my  sick son ( who had got smallpox in all his body ) we were 4 with a cousin and her brother went out with one of ISIS who was wearing Keffiyeh we didn’t know where we were going , at the bus we found another man was waiting for us, he looked at us and laughed, they sold us to that man, we didn’t know where we were going at the bus stop, a car with 2 men were coming they stand in front of us and laughed to us, ISIS sold us to that 2 men. we stayed at their place for 2 nights, it was a home with caravan , i asked them for a doctor to see my son, they cried at my face and rebuked me calling me with bad words and that he sell marry my cousin but she also refused, then they told us that they found a man wanted to buy us , next night (they work at nights) they took us to Raqqa to an Australian man called (Abou Zarkaoi) they negotiated on our prices the Australian said i’m already married i don’t want to marry any of them, but i need servants to serve my family he had 2 daughters and 3 sons, i asked them what about my son, the Australian said if you won’t make troubles i will buy him too, i said we won’t make any problems, so he bought us all, ISIS were very happy and said thanks God it was a good buy . we stayed there for 5 months and a half cleaning his 2 floors house, cooking for them he didn’t let us to go outdoor . We lived in the suburbs where there was an electricity station nearby, it wasn’t in the city . One of the neighbors daughter (who were from Arabs tribes, not members of ISIS ) escaped from her father home and hid herself inside the water tank heaters in the Australian house, she said that she wanted to join the Islamic State, her family looked for her all around but they couldn’t find her, they knew that she was at the Australian house, we  that too but we couldn’t dare to say it, so they complained to ISIS court to check his house, a lot of ISIS came into our house and said if we found her here the Australian would be punished, if not the girl’s family would be then, ISIS came and looked for her all around the house, but they couldn’t find her. next day a transporter came with 2 cars on it, we all the Australian family and the neighborhood girl hid into the cars with the man things so no one will find her and headed to Mosul crossing Al-Jazeera. we arrived to Mousl to ( Harba ) place, where we stayed at ( Abou Monder) home a friend of ( Abou Zarkaoi ) he was wounded at hospital and lost his kid and wife after aircraft raids, we all stayed at (Abou Monder) home with other 2 women ( came with us from Raqqa, one of them lost her husband during fighting, she was supposed to marry Abou Monder after 3 months ) and they did, after 10 days ( Abou Zarkaoi ) left with the girl and his family to Mousl . One day ( Abou Monder )got a call from ISIS threatening him that Raqqa state knew ( Abou Zarkaoi ) kidnapped a girl and escaped to Mosul, but they won’t let him go out of it, so he was wanted to ISIS justice in Mosul. Opposite to the building i stayed in there was a family of civilians not ISIS, they asked me by hand gestures who are we and what we were doing there,( they didn’t dare talking to us, so we kept communicating with gestures for 3 days), i told them that we were jailed at that house so they wanted us to pass through and once we got into their home they will help us to flee, we didn’t get the chance to do it, Raqqa ISIS called ( Abou Monder ) again ant told him if he won’t confessed of ( Abou Zarkaoi ) place then they will take him instead, so i told my neighbors about it they were very sad and cried for us they said won’t you ever get your freedom from ISIS, then they asked if i had any phone number to call, i sent them my brother’s by a piece of paper down to their home . One day a transporter came once again to take us back to Raqqa. abou hamz was jailed . the 2 men who came to take us back to Raqqa, noticed that we were trying to escape so they told us once we get to Raqqa we will slaughter you, then while they were at balcony talking over the phone i told my cousin to jump from 4th floor i did it too with my son ,i said either we die or escape whatever was the result it would better than living as ISIS captive, and entered our neighbour home they immediately opened the door and let us in and gave us black clothes to wear, he told us that was too dangerous to stay there were alot of ISIS, so he took us to his uncle house we stayed for 5 days, we heard that all men women children were carrying arms and looked for us all over the place even in the water tanks on the roofs, so i called my brother and told him to send someone to help us get out of there, it was very dangerous on the owners too, the man was a very good Muslim he cared for us just like his children,i will never forget his wonderful act of charity, i will be grateful for him forever.  the sixth night he gave us black cloths, guided us to a safe road and gave us a phone to call Peshmerga . It was summer we were walking and stepping on long thorns and our feet were bleeding all the way it was too dark didn’t know where we were walking it was very tough night having no one around in that darkness, i called someone from Peshmerga called Abou Newroz i told that we fled from ISIS had no water kids were crying walking in the darkness knowing nowhere, he said keep walking to newel and cross the water, i refused it was deep water we were afraid of getting into the water there might dangerous animals i said i would go back he refused and said walk on you would find shallow side you would be able to cross the water     
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
“I” How long did you spend in captivity ?
“R” From august to june .
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
“I” Do you think that violent experience has affected your health ?
“R” Yes, of course, my eyes are in pain, i have a bad headache and i can’t sleep because of overthinking . since a person is not comfortable he will keep feeling the pains all over his body . 
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
“I” How much do you feel unwell psychologically ?
“R” I’m not well at all . 
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
“I” How bad is your eyesight ?
“R” It was very good now wherever i use the phone it sheds tears and hurts, number 3 .
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
“I” Now you can tell us if you had any kind of linesses before or no, ok?
“R” Ok 
“I” Do you feel somewhere in your body that it’s numb ?
“R” Yes,  only in my feet, only sometimes ,it’s not very bad .
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
“I” Do you have difficulties in walking, do your feet hurt while you walk ? how much ?
“R” Yes, when after i walk around i sit for a while i feel senseless in my feet , 50% .
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
“I” Do you faint sometimes ?
“R” No, i don’t .
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
“I” Do you have difficulties with smelling, hearing, or seeing ? how much ?
“R” sometimes i feel suffocated, yes i have problems with my eyes, but it’s not very bad .
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
“I” Do you find it difficult to breathe sometimes  ?
“R” No, i don’t .
The respondent already said feel suffocating sometimes only when she is sad . 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
“I” Do you feel dizzy sometimes ?
“R” No. 
“I” Do you have headaches ?
“R” Yes, i have it sometimes .
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
“I” Do you have heart problems ? how much ?
“R” I don’t feel at ease, my heart is always in pain and sadness .
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
“I” Do you have gastrointestinal problems ?
“R” Yes, when i cry, it hurts .
“I” How bad is it ?
“R” When i cry i feel all my body is in pain .
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
“I” how have you got these illnesses, is the overthinking is the main reason for all of that ?
“R” Yes, It’s all because of overthinking, now my hair falls a lot, psychological doctors told me that because of overthinking . 
 “I” What do you mean by overthinking ?
“R” i mean when i go to sleep, i only sleep for 5 minutes, then i start thinking of how was our life before ISIS, we were living at our home, had no troubles, then everything turned upside down . 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
“I” We will give you few choices of illnesses to see if it’s because of psychological disorders or if it’s not, you can tell us, ok ?
“R” Ok .
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
“I” Do your eyes hurt because of thinking and being sad, or you do have a physical disorder ?
“R” Actually when i cry, it hurts and burning a lot . 
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
 “I” Muslims say because you disbelieved of God that’s why he punished you, do you think that right ?
“R” No, i don’t believe that’s right . 
I couldn’t understand exactly what was the interpreter was trying to explain, because it’s about specific beliefs related to Yazidi religion .
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
“I” Do you believe God punished you by making you live through all of that misery ?
“R” No, i don’t believe that, because i never did wrong to anyone before .
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
“I” Have your manners and dealing with people changed after you went through that violent experience , like sometimes you avoided talking to someone because you already knew you will easily get upset with him ?
“R” Yes, i’ve changed a lot, i wasn’t like know irritable even at my son i get nervous a lot .
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
“I” Do the Yazidi help you now, or you feel they don’t respect you ?
“R” They respect me, but since i came here i had nothing to start my life, but none helped with anything .
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
“I” Why the didn’t help, is it because they look down to you after you were captive by ISIS, you know some people they say bad words about who fell between ISIS hands , do they look at from that view ?
“R” Yes, i know some people do that, but they are not the same, some are respectables some other aren’t .
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
“I” Do you believe in Peacock Angel ? has your faith in your religion changed? is it stronger or weaker than before ?
“R” No, it didn’t change my beliefs, yes i believe in Peacock angel and i swear in him and pray . 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
“I” What do you usually do when you get sad or angry or when your eyes hurt, to make you feel relieved ?
“R” I have nothing to do, sometimes i feel upset for 2 days so i take a walk and breathe fresh air .
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
“I” Do you have other ways to make you feel better ? 
“I” No, i always convince myself that with the time i will forget, but i can’t, it’s something very difficult to forgot. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
“I” Now we will mention few things to ask if they helped you to cope with your depress or no ?
“R” Ok .
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
“I” Does thinking of your family make you feel stronger or weaker ?
“R”  weak .
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
“I” Do you trust yourself that you can go through everything bad ?
“R” It’s very tough on me .
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
“I” Is praying good for you, if you do ?
“R” Yes, i pray for the captives, but i’m not sure if God accept them or he listens listen to me .
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
“I” Does retreat helps you better than sitting and talking with people ?
“R” When i talk to my family i feel better, but when i sit alone i feel very bad .
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
“I” Do you avoid anything or anyone that remind you of ISIS ?
“R” However i tried, i won’t forget, since ISIS is always there in daily talks in our life, as much as we suffered, we can’t avoid .
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
“I” Do the talks with your family make you better ?
“R” Yes, i feel better .
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
“I” Do the psychological talks helps you too ?
R” Yes, they come to ask, and i tell them if i had sickness or difficulty at sleeping, then i feel better . 
“I” Does your talk here make you feel better ?
“R” Yes .
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
“I”Do the talks and living with the Yazidi women make you feel better ? do they help you ?
“R” Yes, sometimes they go to market, and i take care of their kids, and if i go the market, they look after my son, yes it helps me to get better .
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
“I” Do you take anti depression medicine that you can buy from pharmacy or any other natural herbs treatment?
“R” No, i don’t take medicine .
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
“I” Do the psychologist sessions help you ? are they individual or with groups ? 
“I” Yes, they come here, individual, it helps yes .
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
“I” Have you visited Lalash, did you feel better ?
“R” Yes i went there 3 times, after i fled from ISIS, i pray and do the religious ritual this the thing that i get used to do . 
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
“I” Do you take any kind of medicine, herbal or those from pharmacy?
“R” No, i don’t take any. 
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” Have you been to doctors clinics, do they help you?
“R” I went there only few times, i thought i have Hemorrhoids, i did test couples of times,then they said i have nothing. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” Do the psychological doctors see you individually or collectively? and how much do they help?
“R” We see him individually, yes i like speaking with them .
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” Do you go to Lalesh does it make feel better being there, how much?
“R” Yes, i go, my last visit to Iraq, i went there and prayed, i don’t feel better but i used to do it .
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” THe social assistants do they help you too?
“R” Yes, they do.
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
“I” What do the social assistants and therapists do to help you to feel better?
“R” Whenever i need something i ask assistants and they help me, and psychological doctors they always say if they can help they will do at once, and speaking to them make me relieved .
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
“I” What kind of help you still need to get, but you haven’t got yet?
“R” I didn’t ask for anything. 
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
“I” Now we have few questions about how do you feel in specific cases in the last 7 days ?
“R” OK.
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
“I” You still have strong feelings like you are still living it again?
“R” Yes, i still feel it very bad.
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
“I” Do you sleeping troubles?
“R” Yes, i do have nightmares when i woke and keep thinking of them i can’t go back to sleep, like when the air raids shell ISIS sites where they jail captives including my family and children. 
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
“I” When you see a Muslim person does it still remind you of ISIS?
“R” Yes, i still remember them.
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
“I” Do you get upset, angry, or irritable easily the last few days?
“R” Not always, but yes sometimes i suddenly feel upset.
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
“I” Do you sometimes try not to remember them but you still do?
“R” It doesn’t matter how hard i try, but i will always thinking of them unconsciously.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
“I” Have you tried avoiding thinking of them?
“R” Yes, i do, but i can’t i still have bad feelings about it.
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
“I” Do you feel like was unreal like dream?
“R” Yes, i didn’t believe such a thing would happen to us.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
“I” did you avoiding thinking of them?
“R” However i do i won’t forget it at all.
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
“I” Their pictures pop into your mind all the time?
“R” How hard i tried but i see their pictures always in my head.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
“I” Do you still feel easily startled of their pictures?
“R” Yes, i do, a lot.  
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
“I” Have you tried to stop thinking of them, or you don’t want to forget them?
“R” I can’t forget them, sometimes i give up and can’t stand up on my feet again, but i have a son so i try to come back to the normal life, i try to be strong only for his sake, otherwise i ‘m nothing at all.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
“I” Do you feelings of like a dead body or like an empty inside?
“R” Yes, i feel like i’m buried alive in misery. 
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
“I” Have you got the feelings like you are once again between ISIS arms?
“R” No,i don’t.
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
“I”
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
“I” Have you tried to remove them from your memory?
“R”No, i haven't, i can’t forget them.
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
“I” Do you have concentration troubles?
“R” I sometimes feel sage, other times i feel like i’m out of my mind.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
“I” Remembering them make you feel irritable or suffocated?
“R”Yes, indeed i feel suffocated very badly especially when i see my husband and family photos, i feel terrible bad.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
“I” Which one do you think better, your sight or hearing?
“R” Actually i don’t pay attention to surrounding. 
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
“I” Do you prefer talking about what happened to you or avoiding bringing it up again?
“R” I prefer talking about it.
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
“I” Since you arrived here what were the good things you found here?
“R” At the beginning when i arrived here i was still afraid of ISIS i felt them all around me here too,but then i felt things got better.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
“I” What do you think about the programs welcomed you here, is it good or bad, and how much?
“R” Yes, they are good.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” What are the best 3 things you found here? like brought here by plane and what?
“R” they brought us safely here, the assistants are very good to us, and we will be forever grateful to Germany which has sheltered us and become home for us after losing everything.
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” And what are the 3 bad things? about this project or even your stay in Germany in general?
“R” I haven’t seen bad things here .
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
“I” What is you hope for the future?
“R” I don’t have any hope 
“I” OK, Thanks a lot .