Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [099.wav]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married or not?
R: I am not. 
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
	I:  Can you read and write?
	R: Yes. 
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Are you seeking a job now?
R: Yes, I will do an internship.
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Did you work in Iraq, before ISIS?
R: Yes. 
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
I: What was your work?
R: Alt the stuff.
I: Like working outside?
R: Yes.
I: Like what?
R: The stuff around the house, outside of it. 
I: What are they?
R: Tomatoes and aubergines. 
I: Not for the home. A job by which you earn money. Like a duty or so.
R: No.
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
	I: What is your religion? Your faith, religion?
	R: Yazidi. 
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
I: From which nation, or from which group are you?
R: Lalesh community.
I: So, Yazidi, right?
R: Yes. 
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
	I: What is important now in your life?
	R: My father and my two brothers. 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need in order to rebuild your life here?
R: I need... (not understood—coughings) to return Iraq. 
I: But you are now here. What is needed to built your life here?
R: I do not know.
I: You would like to (not understood—poor articulation).
R: Yes. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Now, when we ask you question, you need to answer them in terms of these degrees: very much, a little...
R: (Affirms)
I: How much control do you have on your life? How much responsible are you for your own life? Do you believe that you yourself control your own life?
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: How would your future will be? What do you think? Future.
According to your thoughts, how will your future be? Please explain with three or four words. 
R: I think it will be very good, my life will be very fine. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: If the situation in Iraq gets better, would you like to return to Iraq, or stay here in Germany?
R: If Iraq gets well, and my farher and brothers return, I would go to Iraq. 
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
I: Why would you return to Iraq?
R: It is our homeland. It is sweet.
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: How much do you feel that here is your home?
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: You, how one can say, what is your judgement about the two years passed in Germany? What is your judgement? What did you learn? How has it passed?
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: What would you say? Why? Why you rated three?
R: Germany is very nice and safe for me. And I learned their language; it is nice. 
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: What needs to change in Iraq so that you can feel safe there?
R: For us, ISIS must be terminated and there must be safety like before. 
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: What is the meaning of the word ‘justice’ for you? Having which meaning, do you consider it? Justice.
R: It is very nice. 
I: What do you yourself think it to be? Like, we are talking about justice now. What is justice for you?
R: For me, it is the return of my family, like the past.
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How much is it important for you if the justice takes place?
R: Very much. 
I: Up to which degree manifestation of justice is important for you?
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
	I: How optimistic are you that justice will ever take place. Are you optimistic?
	R: Yes. 
	I: Up to which degree?
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is the punishment of those who did all that cruelty to you?
R: Yes, it was very evil.
I: How important is it if they get punished—those people who oppressed you?
R: Very much?
I: Up to which degree?
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Why the punishment of that people is that important—those who oppressed?
R: They practiced too much violence upon us and seperated our families and killed many.
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: For you, who must be punished? Who is the one that has to be punished?
R: My brother.
I: No, no. The opressors. Which ones of them? Are they a group, or individuals? Who has to get punished because of the cruelty? Who?
R: ISISers.
I: All?
R: Yes.
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: And how? How, so to speak, should they get punished, in your opinion?
R: We should have done to them what they did to us. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Do you have any information about, namely, punishment or trials are taking place for ISIS? Do you have such an information? Do you know it?
R: (no verbal expression) 
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Which ISISers can you forgive?
R: None. 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: What must happen for you to forgive them?
R: They did many things to us.
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important for you to know all the stuff that ISIS did to Yazidis, to have all the information?
R: Very much. 
I: To which degree?
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How much is it important that the rest know what they did to you, how much they did to you?
R: Very much.
I: Which number? 
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
I: How much is it important that your children and grand children knows what, which cruelties, had been done to you?
R: Very much?
I: Up to which degree?
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why is it important that your children and their children knows it?
R: Because that did too much evil to us. They seperated us from our fathers. It is because of this. 
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: In your opinion, what needs to be done so that we can grant that future generations can know what happened, have all the information about it? 
R: (not understood—poor articulation)
I: So to speak, how can guarantee that coming generations will also know this story, they will not forget it? The second generation, the third one; their chidren and grand children... How can it be preserved?
R: Trials, for them who did it. All the coming ones, would know it so.
I: So, by trials and by telling.
R: Yes. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: Have you ever heard about a commission, named the commission of truth?
R: No.
I: You did not hear?
R: Yes.
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: The truth commission is a noumber of people, a group that is organized by the state, namely, in order to investigate the things had been done to Yazidis by ISIS, they collect information. Then, they write a protocol, a report. How much is it important, so to speak, this thing. 
R: Very much. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What do you think in general? What should be done for this people that has been oppressed by ISIS?
R: The ones under their captivity?
I: The one under their captivity, the lost ones, all of them. What should be done for all this people? Yazidi people.
R: Many things need to be done. ISIS did many things; and now all (Yazidis) are dispersed. They are alone, seperated from their families. There are a little who are not alone. 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: What should be done for Yazidis in particular?
R: If they do something for them it would be great. So to speak, now there are some in the camps; they are miserable; no one does anything for them.
I: So, what should be done for them, in your opinion?
R: They should be together; they should have a city. 
I: So, instead of camps they should live together in cities. 
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: Do you see yourself as a victim of this crimes of ISIS; do you feel that (not understood—confused speech)
R: Yes. 
I: How much, approximately?
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: How much do you feel that you are a victim and it didn’t happen by your free will.
R: Very much. Many people know that what happened to us is not done by us. Many countries know it. 
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think, or believe that in Iraq there can be a peace, a tranquility forever?
R: If ISIS terminates, it can be.
I: So you say, so to speak, if ISIS terminates, it can happen?
R: Yes. 
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you think that, the other countries, if the war ends in countries in a bad condition, as Syria; do you think that there would be peace?
R: A place in which ISIS exists peace cannot be established. We need to have ISIS terminated. It would be good.
I: But, do you have a hope that peace will be established again?
R: A little. 
I: A little?
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: In your opinion, what should be done in Iraq so that Iraq may become peaceful?
R: In my opinion, they shall terminate ISIS; none of them must remain there. 
I: In your opinion, if ISIS is terminated, then Iraq may have tranquility.
R: Yes. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin) li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: And you, in your opinion, on these, umm, the others who pursue a war against ISIS; what is your opinion on them?
R: My opinion is very positive. (They should?) fight and terminate them.
I: So you are happy that there is this thing. 
R: Yes. 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: In your opinion, which changes in Iraq should take place so that Yazidis and  other minorities in Iraq can be safe?
R: If there weren’t ISIS, if they (not understood—poor articulation)
I: So, if they are not concerned with ISIS anymore.
R: Yes. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, have you told your story to any fellow—what you experienced, your story?
R: No. 
I: To friends? To women here? You did not tell them as well?
R: No. 
I: You didn’t talk to anybody?
R: No. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
I: Why haven’t you discussed it?
R: No one came to me; and I have not gone to anyone. I hav not seen anybody.
I: For example, you do not talk about it among other women, as well?
R: We talk; we talk about ISIS. But it is useless. We cannot forget ISIS. 
I: You do not want to hear it, too?
R: No.
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: Since you came to Germany, do you get information concerning how Iraq is, how Kurdistan is?
R: Yes. 
I: Everyday? Or how often?
R: From time to time. Not always. 
I: Once a week? Or for several times?
R: Sometimes once a week, sometimes twice a week.
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
I: Why do you get information?
R: I want to know what they do to ISIS, what in Iraq happens.
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
	I: By which means do you get information? I mean, do you talk; or do you get it from people?
	R: Yes. I have a sister-in-law there. She is alone. Also my married sister is there. 
	I: So you get information from them?
	R: Yes. Many Yazidis tell this stuff—the information about ISIS. 
	I: A sister-in-law of yours, and, who was the other? One of your sisters.
	R: One sister of mine. 
	I: So, you do it by means of what? The Internet, or Facebook, orsomething like this? Do you use Whatsapp?
	R: Yes. 
	I: Which? All, or, or...
	R: Facebook and Whatsapp.
	I: By telephone?
	R: Uh-huh.
	I: Do you also send SMS sometimes?
	R: Uh-uh.
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: Thank you for your answers so far. You have answered so well. We have some further questions; but you do not have to answer all of them. Answer those you would like to.
R: Ok. 
I: What would you...do you want to talk about your story of the times of the ISIS captivity?
R: I was from Kocho village. My whole family were gathered in a school building. They seperated man from us. Some said they killed them; some said they took them to a different place. I do not know anything at all. They took women and girls to (not understood—locality name? ). From [the same locality name] they took us to Mosul. 
We stayed in Mosul, in a house belonging to Christians. We stayed there for five days. They gave us food hardly. 
After they removed me from that house, they took me along with four others to Tal Afar. It was a big place. 
I: Was it also a school? 
R: Not a school; a ceremony hall, a hall.
I: They took you nad four friends of you to Tal Afar, you said, right?
R: Yes. 
I stayed there for ten days. There were many girls staying there. They used to hit us and they were not giving us food. They used to give it once a week. 
I stayed there for ten days. After ten days, we received a telephone. They said, your mothers will  talk to you. 
I: Who?
R: Our mothers. They were not with us. 
I: ISIS facilitated the phone call?
R: Yes. 
I: They gave you the phone and said, your mother is calling you?
R: Yes. 
	The one next to my mother was an ISIS member; the guardian next to us was an ISIS member, too. They used to call each other, and give the telephone tu us, and we were speaking. 
	I talked to my mother. She said to me, ‘where are you?’; I said ‘I do not know, I do not know where here is.’ I said are both my brothers with you? Who are you with?’ She said ‘I and...’ My sister was with her, my sister-in-law was with her, both my younger brothers were not with her. They had taken them to somewhere else. 
	I: (Question not understood—poor articulation)
	R: Yes. After they took them from [same locality with above], I do not know where they took them, Tal Afar or Mosul.
	I: But when you talked on the phone they were not with her.
	R: Yes. 
	I: Only your sister and sister-in-law with her.
	R: Yes. 
	I: She called you and you said you do not know where you were. What then?
	R: I did not know where I was staying. Then the telephone connection with me and her was cut.
	One week after that, they called again. They said ‘Talk to children.’ They said to talk to my brothers—they were with them that time. They gave me the phone. Both my little brothers were with her. I talked to them. After that the phone connection between me and them was also cut. 
	After that, they were coming, and ech ISIS member were taking a Yazidi girl away. Someone came and said ‘You are coming with me.’ I did not go with him. He beat me, but I did not go with him. Then, the day after, he came by me again, said ‘Are you coming with me or not?’ I said I am not coming. 
	I: It was him again?
	R: Yes. He said ‘If you do not come, I will go kill your brother.’ My older brother here. He said ‘If you will not come (not understood—cannot hear clearly) 
	I: Only your brother?
	R: Uh-huh.
	I went with him out of fear. 
	I went with him. I went to his house. He had a family, a large family. I was with his family. He took me with himself. (one word not understood—arabic?) I stayed with him for seven months. After that I escaped to Kurdistan. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
	I: How could you escape?
	R: The son of our bribe’s—my sister in law—uncle was in Kurdistan. I talked to him for three days. He said that someone Yazidi was in Mosul, said ‘He can save you.’ I talked to that Yazidi. He said ‘Stay patient and I will save you.’ I stayed patiently. Then he came to me in a Tuesday. He saerched my house. And he found the house in where I was. I covered myself with black clothes and went out. He was not in the house; he had gone to another country. It was me and his daughter-in-law. Her daughter-in-law were praying and could not leave her place. I wore black clothes and went out through the door. He took me to Mosul and from Mosul fo Kurdistan. 
I: Where was the first place. 
R: It was Tal Afar. 
I: Was the number of the smuggler guy’s number with you? Did you call him?
R: Yes. 
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: She asks that how much all those happened effected your health?
R: After I was freed. It was only me who was freed. My mother was not freed, nor my brothers. 
I: But how them, all those happened, affected your health?
R: A lot. 
I: Affected very much. 
R: After ISIS captured me, they beat me too much. 
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
I: Up to which degree it affected your health, which degree according to here? How much did it affected you? Very much, or a little? If you say ‘null’, then it did not affect at all. If you say (not understood—poor articulation), then it affected very much. 
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: Do you have any pain since then?
R: Yes. They left me with pain. I have pain on my back, because of their beattings. Now my throat... I went several to doctor here but he did not heal me. I sometimes do not have voice while speaking. 
I: How strong is your pain? Up to which degree, according to here?
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you sometimes tremble or have an itch; or, feel numb like when people die they do not sense anymore?
R: No. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you have any problems of movement?
R: No. 
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you sometimes feel that you are going to fall down, or vomit, tremble?
R: No. 
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: She says do you have any problems with seeing, hearng or breathing?
R: No. 
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you feel shortness of breating? Do you feel like you do not inhale enough air?
R: Yes.
I: How hard is it? Namely, you feel hardnes in breathing very much or?
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Do you get dizzy?
R: Sometimes. 
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: Does your heart throb?
R: Yes. 
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Do you have problem of nausea?
R: Yes. 
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
	I: Is there anything else in your mind? Something you would like to mention except these.
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: What do you think?  How did it it affected you, like you have pain, you breath hardly? What do you think? Why is it so?
R: If I walk too much, my throat gets blocked and I breath hardly. 
I: So, while moving.
R: Yes. 
I: So, do you think that all these pains and sufferings are because that you were captured?
R: Yes.  
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Do you think that your pains and aches are psychological?
R: I believe it. 
I: Do you believe?
R: I believe it.
I: For you, up to which degree are they psychological?
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think that you also have bodily problems, alongside with pdychological ones? 
R: Yes. 
I: How much?
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: Do you think that someone made somethink, some magic or so, to you?
R: No.
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: Was it the religious faith that affected you? Do you feel that illness because of religious faith? A thought, something like it?
R: No.
I: No?
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
	I: How much the things happened to you by the hands of ISIS affected your relations with people, with orher people, in comparison with the past?
	R: Very much.
	I: Very much?
	R: Yes. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
I: What, for example? Can you tell how it affected?
R: When I was captured, there were others with me. Many of them were fourteen years old and many of them were eleven. They used to come and take them for themselves and they beat them too much. 
I: Namely, now, the question was that, now, for example, did it affect your relations with your friends, your relatives, other  people, or not? So, did this thing affected your relations with other people or not?
R: Yes. I went to many (not understood—poor articulation) in Iraq. I went to doctors.
I: You have not understood my question, yet. Did your experiences created a negative effect on your relations with others, a negative effect on the relations of you and, for example, your family, your friends, or another Yazidi person? Negative effect. You did not understand? For example, didn’t you have friends before that time?
R: Yes. 
I: But, after that time, did your relations with them failed because you were captured by ISIS?
R: Yes.
I: Yes? So it affected?
R: Yes. Most of my friends were captured. I have not seen them.
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: So, for example, with Yazidis, are there any changesin your relation with Yazidis after you got captured? (not understood—poor articulation)
R: No. 
I: Do you think that Yazidi people is keeping an eye on you so that you may get better; or do you feel a bit  that you are excluded?
R: No. I want to be with them.
I: Do they help you, if you are among them? Do they help you?
R: Yes. 
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I:  Did the thing that you experienced under the captivity of ISIS caused any change in your religious faith? Did it get stronger or weaker?
R: Things that they done to us, they said us to convert to their religion. 
I: No, for you, in your personality. Like, are not you a Yazidi? Did it affect your belief or not?
R: I said, I believe in my own reilgion. 
I: No, for you, for example, did your relation with your deligion change?
R: No.
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
I: Does your religion stay as it was before, or is it stronger, or weaker?
R: It is as it was before. 
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: How do you cope with what happened to you? When those things come into your mind, how do you cope with them, for example, in order to get better in your life?
R: If I remember them, I make myself busy with some other stuff, like talking to a friend.
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: In your opinion, what would you do to get better, to forget it better.
R: I need to forget, but I cannot forget. They were very violent to us.
I: Of course, it is right, yes. But what do you think; what would you do so that you get better gradually, forget it, be relieved, do not think on it too much? What do you need?
R: When I go to school, I forget it. 
I: School is good for you.
R: Yes. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: In your view, when you have god ties with your familiy, your friends, good people, does it help you to get better?
R: Yes. 
I: How much?
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: Do you believe that you yourself have power and can deal with these thoughts and live a peaceful life?
R: Yes. 
I: How much does it affect, for you?
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: If you pray, does it affect? Is it influential?
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
	I: Which one is helpful for you, if you are alone, or, on the contrary, if you are with other people?
	R:  Whenever I get bored, I want to stay alone. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: If these things, things that remind you ISIS, if you do not do those things, for example, a video or a potograph? If you say this thing helps me to avoid remembering it? Is it good in your view?
R: Yes. 
I: How much? 
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Is it helpful for you to talk a lot about your story?
R: Yes. 
I: How much?
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Would you say that it is helpful if you go to, for example, a psychologist, or have medicines prescribed?
R: Yes.
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
	I: Does help comes to you from Yazidis? Do Yazidis help you?
	R: Yes. 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
	I: Can you add onto these things anythink that helps you to forget the stuff,  to feel better?
	R: No.
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you ever taken psychological medicines for (not understood—simultaneous speeches).
R: Yes. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: Have you ever gone to a psychologyst?
R: In Iraq, I went. 
	I: Haven’t you gone here?	
	R: No.
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: When you went to the psychologist there, you talked to the doctor alone; or were there others, other women with you?
R: No I was alone. 
I: How much did it help?
R: Very much.
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
R: Yes, I went to Lalesh.
I: How much did it help?
R: I went and I felt better. 
I: It was good. Up to which degree did it help you?
R: Very much.
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Have you ever taken natural drugs, helbal drugs, not chemical ones, but natural ones, for, for example, your psychology?
R: (no answer is heard)
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Have you ever gone to a doctor?
R: Yes, to a prsychologist.
I: No other doctors?
R: I went.
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much did it help?
R: Very much. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
Do you think that psychiatric menidicines, the psychatrist (not sure if ‘doxtorê nefsi’ means psychologist or psychiatrist), do you think that they helped you? What benefits you get may make you to say you get dizzy less, or your problems go away?
R: Yes. 
I: Do you believe that they help you?
R: Yes.
I:  So what would you say about how it helped? Did talking helped you, or...
R: Yes, talking helped me. 
I: Talking helped you. 
R: Yes. 
I: What would you say about how it helped you, how it (not understood—poor articulation)? How did it help you?
R: (not understood—poor articulation) They were not saddening stuff, but cheerful ones.
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much those social workers that work for you helped you?
R: Very much. 
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Do you have anything, any kind of help, in your mind that you think it would be good for you but is not provided?
R: No. 
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: We will ask you some questions about your psychological situation and you should answer how much they affected you in the last week.
R: Ok. 
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
	I: In the last week, have you recalled this thing, what happened to you under ISIS captivity?
	R: Yes. 
	I: Didn’t those bad feelings and thoughts come to your mind again?
	R: (no clear verbal articulation)
	I: Before seven days?
	R: (no clear verbal articulation)
	I: Up to which degree?
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: In the last week, have you had any problems with sleeping, like you cannot fall asleep?
R: Yes. 
I: How hard?
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Are there any things that makes you remember those evils, like, it may be a cloth, an object, or something?
R: No. 
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: In the course of last few days, do you easily get bored or angry?
R: Yes. 
I: Which degree?
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: When, in the last week, you remember those things do you try not to bother yourself and try to make yourself relaxed?
R: Yes. 
I: Up to which degree did you try?
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: When you do not want to think on it, can you say ‘I don’t want to think on it’ stop thinking on it?’ and stop thinking on it?
R: No.
I: You cannot?
R: Yes.
 I: Up to which degree?
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Do you sometimes think that it was a dream, not something really happened?
R: No. 
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Do you try to immediately push it away, when those things come to your mind sometimes?
R: Yes. 
I: Which degree?
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
	I: Sometimes do the pictures of the past come to your mind, like popping all of a sudden coming infront of your eyes? Do you happen to experience it?
	R: Yes.
	I: Which degree?
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: When those pictures come in front of your eyes, when a flashback happens, did you feel pain, do you fear?
R: Yes. 
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try not tho think on that pictures?
R: Yes. 
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: When you see that that pain exhausted youor bored, do you try not to grapple with them and make yourself busy with something else?
R: Yes. 
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: When those bothersome feelings grow inside you, those feelings, namely... how can one say... as if they are strange, as they’re dead. So, you did not feel them at that degree, namely, you didn’t feel it as strongly as before. Namely, how can I explain for you, like they were not that difficult like in the past.
R: Yes. 
I: They were not difficult?
R: Not. 
I: Which degree. 
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: After that time, you, you, can you feel as it is now now, it is before now; it was happened and gone?
R: Yes. 
I: Do you feel like that?
	R: Yes. 
	I: To which degree?
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: After that thing happened, can’t you fall asleep?
R: No.
I: Which degree?
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: Like we talked before, you do not feel it so strongly. Do you sometimes have very strong feelings because of the things you remember? So you do not feel it strongly, but for a period you feel it so strongly.
R: Not for a period.
I: Not for a period?
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Do you try to move those things out of your mind?
R: Yes.
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: When you remember those things, does it happen to you that you cannot fouc on your bussinness, like reading?
R: Yes. 
I: Does your focus is lost?
R: Yes.
I: How much does it affect you?
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: When you have disturbing memories, do they them affect your body? Like do you sweat, or do you have difficulty in breathing, do you get dizzy, does your heart throbs? Do those memories do these?
R: Yes. 
I: Yes?
R: Yes. 
I: How much do they affect you?
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Do you have dreams of them? Those things in your dreams?
R: No.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: Do you think that you have become more watchful? Are you more watchful of objects? Or do you listen to things around more?
R: Yes. 
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
	I: Do you try not to talk about it?
	R: Yes. 
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: Other questions are over. Now I will ask you that since you have come to Germany (not understood—poor articulation) What positive things can you tell about Germany, accorging to your thoughts and what you have seen in your life in Germany?
R: My life in Germany has been very good. I go to school. I learn their language. (not understood—poor articulation) It is not like Iraq.
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: What are your thoughts about the people of the organization that took you from kurdistan to Germany? What degree would you give to this project?
R: Four. 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
	I: Can you mention three most positive apects of this project?
	R: They helped us very much; they brought me to Germany. I was very happy that they helped us.
	I: This is a point. Others?
	R: We trust them. We are safe here. We are very peaceful in Germany. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
	I: are there bad points in youe view? Do you have any criticism on this project?
	R: No.
	I: There is not?
	R: No.
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
	I: What creates in you a hope for the future? What are your hopes for the future? Whati is for you a source of hope? (Not understood—poor articulation)
	R: I want my future here to be very good.
	I: But, what gives you hope, for example? What are your hopes for your future here? What is in your mind? What are your hopes?
	R: My future... I want to learn their language; do jobs as their jobs. 
	I: We asked all questions. Do you have any questions for us? Do you want to ask anything?
	R: No.
	I: Do you want to add anything on what we have talked?
	R: No.
	I: Thank you very much, for you you answered all these questions, for you were so smart, for you gave very important information.
	I: We do these interviews and we will write articles on them and share tham with other people so that they know your opinion; the ministry also will know if you are happy or not happy with the project. So they will know it so that there may be changes, or at least they will be aware of this thing.