FILE: 107
I: How old are you? It is 39 right, If you were born in ’76, or it is 41?
R: I am 40.
I: Are you married, Delal?
R: Yes l am.
I: Where is your husband, Delal?
R: On 1st of August he came to Turkey and it’s been two months that he arrived in Serbia …1:08
I: How many children do you have?
R: I have 9 children; 6 girls and 3 son.
I: Are you all staying together?
R: Yes we are staying together.
I: You’re staying only with your children?
R: Yes, only my children.
I: Do you know how to read and write?
R: A little bit.
I: Till which grade did you study at school in Iraq?
R: Approximately 6th grade. My mum was ill and l was taking caring of her. So l didn’t care that much about school.
I: Did you finish 6th grade?
R: No.
I: Now are you going to a school here?
R: I’m taking a course for the alphabet on Monday, Tuesday and Thursday.
I: Are you working?
R: Just (my) housework.
I: Are you looking for a job?
R: No not really. I don’t know the language, nor go to the school (to take language courses).
I: Did you work in Kurdistan?
R: No not really.
I: What is your religion?
R: We are Ezidis.
I: İn your life, what is important for you?
R: My children, my husband.
I: What do you need to have a better life?
R: We’re very well here now. l feel happy when our family members get free. One of my brothers is still captured and because of him l feel distressed. If we knew that he escaped, l’ll be so happy.
Thanks God now we’re happy, we’ve got rid of that fear but when we hear something bad about the situation there we feel distressed.
I: We’re going to ask you some questions and you’ll asnwer them by numbers. For example we’ll ask you how your health is. You’ll answer according to the grades like good, better.
Do you believe in yourself that you can handle your life?
R: 4.
I: How do you think the future will it be like for you?
R: I think it will be better.
I: If the situation in Kurdistan gets better, where do you want to live? You’ll continue to stay here, go to Kurdistan, to somewhere else in Iraq or to another country?
R: If the situation really gets better in Iraq, like before, if l could stay with all my family we can go back to Iraq. If not, no l don’t want to go anywhere else.
I: Why do you want to go there if it gets better?
R: If it gets better, if we know that nothing bad will happen to us it is good for us. But if this bad situation goes on there, l won’t go there ever.
I: How comfortable are you in Germany? Here or in your country?
R: Here, to be honest.
I: You’ve been here for two years. Your experiences of this place, how good are they (the Germans) for you?
R: I’m very happy here. 4.
I: Why did you give that high grade? In what respect was it good for you?
R: We were in Iraq before. We were working in agriculture and the children were going to Suleymaniyeh(to work) but our economical situation was not that good in Iraq, we had nothing. But here the children are going to work and school, so it is better here. Sometimes my children would go to work in Suleymaniyeh and not come back for 3 months. Had they earned 200 or 300 and could buy something with it, we wouldn’t have had any difficulty.
I: In your opinion, what should be changed or happen in Iraq-Kurdistan that you can stay and live there safely?
R: If there is justice for Ezidis as well, if there is peace and quiet for Ezidis, l mean if Ezidis realise their rights.
25th of May, this year, l went to Iraq and came back to Germany on the 1st of August, l stayed there for 2 months with my two little children but l had no comfort there till l came back to Germany. It was so hot, the children had stomach ache, they vomitted. The electricity went off lots of times for 3-4 hours.
I: What does justice mean for you? Or what is the justice for you?
R: I want Ezidis to realise their rights as well, to feel safe and live in comfort.
I: What kind of rights do you mean?
R: I want Ezidis to have rights, l want their name to be everywhere, people to care about them.
I: How important is it for you if justice is served for those incidents that you have lived through? 
R: I want justice to be served.
I: Do you believe that justice will be served? To what degree?
R: Yes, l’m sure hundred percent that justice will be served.
I: How important is it for you that ISIS and those people are punished? Why is it important that they are punished?
R: Whatever they did to us, l want them to live/experience those same things. I want their husbands, wives and children to be seperated from each other. We wish that they(ISIS) had the same experiences and we wish to see it.
I: Who do you mean why saying ‘they’? Some people or all ISIS?
R: All of ISIS; their children, wives. They(women) were even worse than ISIS(men).
I: How should they be punished?
R: We wish them to live in the same situation, whatever they did to us; to stay alone in the streets, find nothing to eat, have their women and girls of 7 years old kidnapped. Whatever they did to us, l wish them to have the same experiences.
I: Have you heard anything about ISIS being taken to court or not?
R: I don’t know if there are lawsuits filed against them in Iraq …26:27 l don’t know it for sure, I wasn’t an eyewitness but on TV it was said that this is Ebu Ali, ‘Who knows him?’. He was torturing Ezidis, kidnapping Ezidi girls and selling children, l’m an eyewitness of this. Once it was said on TV that he’s been arrested, once it was said that he came to Kurdistan. So we don’t know something for sure.
I: So do you know what happened to Ebu Ali after that?
R: No, it was just said on TV. That he came to Kurdistan. You know those girls were talking about him on TV. She(one of the girls) was saying ‘We want him to be arrested.’ Rudaw TV(a Kurdish channel) asked her and she said ‘l can and talk to you; he sold me.’
I: Do you think about forgiving these people?
R: I wish we Ezidi women had the power to seek our rights. How can we forgive them?
I: How can you forgive them? What should happen that you can forgive them?
R: We can never forgive them. Because we’ve been persecuted so much.
I: How important is it for you to know the reason for which those things were done to you?
R: We didn’t know it at first. We were captured and they(ISIS) wanted us to convert to their religion. We were told that ‘Because of this reason(Ezidi’s belief), we captured you.’’ But we told them ‘Even if you kill us, we won’t convert to another belief.’ So it was so important for us to know the reason.
I: How important is it for you that the world hears what happened to you Ezidis?
R: I want all the world to know about what happened to us.
I: How important is it for you that your children know about the incidents you’ve experienced?
R: That’s very important.
I: Why is it so important for you that the world and your children know what happened to you Ezidis?
R: For example, we didn’t know why we were captured before. But now we want all the world to know why they(ISIS) did so to us, why they kidnapped our children-girls, why they forced Ezidi women to marry them. So l want everybody to know why they did so to us. It is very important for us.
I: In your opinion, how can all these incidents be saved for the next generation to know about them?
R: If all states write about us, those incidents could be saved.
I was from Koço. My daughter Ibana, me and a little boy were captured. Actually all people from Koço were captured. We all were one, everybody were relatives of each other; uncles, aunts, they all knew each other. For instance, my uncle got lost with his 6 children. Why? Another uncle with his elder son are lost. My 20 years old brother is lost. All these people are lost with all their families and children. Koço was a big village with large families and we all were one. So l’m asking why all these people are lost. All Ezidis, it doesn’t matter where s/he is from; from Koço,Tel Ezer, Siba or Şengal. All of them are like my cousins. So l feel pain for all Ezidis.
I: Have you ever heard about a comittee of truth that works on Ezidis?
R: No committe has ever talked to us here. When we were in Iraq, lots of comittees were coming to see us, some from US or some from different countries. They were asking us what happened to us.
I: Don’t you know the names of those comittees?
R: l didn’t ask the name. They didn’t do like you do now, they were just asking questions about where and how we were captured. They didn’t ask us questions like you do, nor talked to us on our rights. We just talked about our story, l mean how we were captured.
I: The comittee of truth is such a comittee which the state organizes and arranges . For example when there is persecution on some people, this comittee searches about them, like ‘how did it happen, why did it happen?’ So in your opinion, does such a comittee work?
R: Yes, it’ll be good. I want such a comittee to search on us.
I: We’ve heard that a committee was constituted and this comittee has a file and search on it. This file is about people that have experienced persecutions. The state will be carried out against those people(ISIS) that did so. The comittee put the incidents into the file and it was presented to the state. So the state will decide on that if it will be carried out or not. But the important point is that some people made this file and presented it to the state.
In your opinion, what can be done for Ezidis now?
R: Lots of Ezidis live in mobile houses. Lots of families are captured. Some children of these families escaped, some men escaped, some women escaped. I want any help to be carried out for Ezidis.
I: So you want help for these families that live in mobile houses?
R: Yes, those families live in very bad conditions in these mobile houses. There are some families that have lived in tents for 3 years, it rains you know. So l want any help to be carried out for all Ezidis.
I: So what should be done for Ezidis by the state?
R: I want a legal procedure to be made to recognise this massacre as a genocide and to save Ezidis from ISIS.
I: Do you feel that now you’re known as a victim? ISIS did these incidents to you. For example personally do you feel like that?
R: Yes l do.
I: Why do you feel like that? Why do you feel that the world knows you as a victim?
R: I’m following the news on TV, facebook. Nadia Murad let the world know about Ezidis. My daughter Ivana does it as well, and some others went to many countries and talked about this massacre. They want everybody to know about what happened to Ezidis. She(her daughter) has gone to Nurnberg now. I wasn’t at home, she told me that she would leave and told me that Ilon is there. It was something like that. She and Ikhlas have gone.
I: Ikhlas? The one next to me?
R: I think he is.
I: Do you think that one day there will be peace in Iraq?
R: You know before that, there was a war between Iran and Iraq. In 2014, it started on Ezidis We see that it gets worse but not better. So l don’t believe that there will be such a peace in Iraq.
I: And in other countries like Syria, do you think that one day there will be peace?
R: It’s been 74 times that we’ve experienced these massacres and these occured in Iraq.
I: I mean the other countries.
R: Yes there is a war in Syria as well but I believe that there will be peace in other countries except for Iraq.
I: To what degree do you believe that in other countries there will be peace?
R: It’s just my opinion. I pay attention to my country more. So we see that in all countries the peace gets better. There is no country which has not experienced a war, but after the war they are relieved. But ever since l can remember, Iraq has been in this war.
I: What should be done to make Iraq get better like the other countries?
R: You know there are lots of different movements in Iraq like Hashdi Shabi, ISIS. If these movements disappear, there will be a better situation. I want everybody to do something good for Iraq, support it. A long time ago l left Iraq and l came to a beautiful place. So how l am comfortable here, l want the same peace for all Iraq as well. I’m not saying that here l’m ok and l don’t care Iraq, let it have war. I want everybody to have this peace. So l want the other countries to help Iraq.
I: Do you have any information on the struggle against ISIS? Or what do you think about this struggle against ISIS?
R: Hashdi and PKK struggles against ISIS. They have now less power but there is still war.
I: What can be done to save the rights of these people, Ezidis?
R: The other states can help them.
I: Do you talk to somebody about the incidents that you lived?
R: Sometimes l see Ezidis and they’re asking me questions about what happened to us. Not just the people from the camp but people from other cities also ask me. Sometimes we women are talking to eachother on these incidents. For example, lots of children hear these. Their mother captured by ISIS say …1:02:10 They’re still captured in ISIS’s hands.
I: You’are talking to eachother daily?
R: Not always, because everybody deals with their works, going shopping, gets children to the kindergarten. When we hear something we share with each other.
I: So once a week, twice a week?
R: Sometimes once-twice a week, sometimes once a month. It depends; if we hear news.
I: Do you talk to a doctor on these incidents?
R: No, l haven’t talked to any doctor.
I: With the social specialist?
R: Yes, sometimes l talk to her. When we, my cousins, have a problem we talk to her.
I: With a TV channel or social media means?
R: When l was in Iraq, some questions were asked. But for lots of times my daughter went to the other cities for interviewing. But me, no l haven’t interviewed.
And no other country help us, give permission like Germany does. These (Ezidi) women, who can save them? We are so glad with anything that they do for us. This is such a big goodness for Ezidis. For example there is a woman with lots children here but without her caretakers. But anyway she is fine here. Our social responsible is really nice to us; whatever they can do, they never refuse.
I: Have you ever written something on the incidents?
R: No.
I: Do you follow the news on internet or facebook?
R: Sometimes l listen to the news in Arabic but l don’t read or write. Two months ago l went to Iraq; whomever l see or talk to, l tell them the goodness of Germany.
I: For how many times do you listen to the news? Everyday or sometimes?
R: Even if l don’t understand them, l ask my children. Once a day l log in Facebook and just by pictures shared, l’m trying to get if the news is a good or a bad one. And when l don’t get it, l’m asking my children.
I: Why do you care these news? Why do you follow them?
R: We still care about the people in Iraq and our caretakers, Ezidis. To know what’s going on there. Some go back their homes. ISIS is still bombing there and kill people. So that’s why we follow the news and sometimes log in Facebook.
I: By what means do you get news from Kurdistan? By telephone, watsapp?
R: Mostly by watsapp and rarely by telephone. If the watsapp doesn’t work, we call by phone. Sometimes we don’t have enough time to talk by phone, we just send a ‘voice’ to ask how it is going or to know what they are doing.
I: We’ve almost finished the half. Shall we have a break?
Remember that whenever you don’t feel comfortable, you can say that ‘l don’t want to answer.’ When we ask you questions on how you were captured, if you feel disturbed you are free not to give any answer.
R: Ok no problem.
I: Could you tell us about when you were captured? Could you tell how it was.
R: It couldn’t be worse. Probably it was 3rd of May when we were captured in Shengal and put into a school in Tel Afar. From morning till evening, our meal, for breakfast, lunch and supper, sometimes was just an egg and a bread. I was still nursing my little son. I didn’t have enough milk. Because they didn’t give me enough food, l didn’t have enough milk(to breastfeed her son). And except for the milk he could eat nothing else, he was little. Once l called my children and told them that he didn’t calm down and said ‘They don’t give us food.’ I didn’t know what to do with him, ‘Shall l leave him?’ He was biting my breast and my hands. We were begging them to give us some food. But they were firing us by saying ‘Go away!’ For 6-7 days we stayed there. We stayed in Bagosh for 8 days too. We were thousands of girls and women. It was summer and hot. There was no place to lie or sleep. For 8 eight days, we didn’t sleep, we just sat up. It was so hard, everybody was making their toilet just there, that smell, we were about to have scables.
After that; it was 9 in the night. Some men(Ezidis) stayed with them(ISIS), they were the cousins of my children; two cousins of my children and two sons of my brother-in-law. They were in ISIS’s hands too. They were told that if they convert to ISIS’s religion, they will not be killed. Because they were scared, they uttered a few words to convert their religion but you know in the heart they were again Ezidis. So they(ISIS) told us that ‘Because you converted to our religon, we’ll place you into the houses in Tel Afar. We were brought to a Shia village named Keser Mehra and we stayed there for 4 months. There were fleas in the sugars. After those 4 months, in December we were put into the those big trucks and covered us with a nylon cover. We heard that Mesud(ex-president of Kurdistan region in Iraq) says ‘I will rescue the Ezidis from ISIS.’ Because of that we all were brought to Mosul and stayed there for a month. That month was very hard for us too.
We were brought to Tel Afar from Mosul on the first day of January. The Shias had lands there. We were put into their houses and we stayed 6 months too. We were told ‘So because you converted to our religon, we brought you and put you into these houses. So we’ll give you some work to do and you’ll work for us.’ Some were herding, 1000 flock of sheep. Actually these herds were belong to the Ezidis but got together. We went to somewhere like a vineyard and worked there, dealt with the trees, carrying straw. Those men that were with us; they were going to carry wheat, straw, some other stuff. ISIS was forcing Ezidis to go to the villages around and bring all these stuff to Tel Afar.
In those 6 months Some Ezidi families escaped and came to Kurdistan. After these families escaped, we all were got together in Tel Afar. The women, the girls and the children were seperated from each other. We stayed in their hands for one year and a month, till the last month. It was two sons of my brother-in-law, two cousins of my children; they escaped. Two cars came; the half got on, the other half stayed. I and my son and my little daughter stayed. Another 9 or 10 people stayed with us as well. After they escaped, for 5 days we stayed in statue, me and my daughter and another 6 or 7 Ezidis. We were out of food. We hid ourselves. There were two cars; some got on it, some stayed. Because it hadn’t enough place. The cousins of my children and two sons of my brother-in-law escaped by the car. Me and my daughter, we stayed. We could not stand the hunger anymore. We went out of it. There were muslims around and they denounced us, saying ‘Here there are some Ezidis’ so we were captured. My daughter Ivana was taken away from me and they wanted my son as well. I refused and told them ‘If you want, take us both and kill us or else l won’t give you my son. One of them(ISIS) called Ebu Ali. We were 300 women and 200 children. We all were brought and put into a school in Tel-Afar. Ebu Ali got my daughter from me. After staying one night in the school, we were put into the trucks and sent to Syria.
We were taken to Syria and stayed in a jail for 5 days. It had two-three floors. Inside of it was dark, we were knocking the doors, knocking the windows but nobody heard of us. For 5 days we felt suffocated there, we were like deads. After that, we were taken to a field in Raqqa. It was Ramadan, we started fasting. It was June, we stayed there till the Ramadan finished. After finishing the Ramadan, the men of ISIS were coming and taking the women and girls partly and selling them in bazaar. Once they chose me, l was told that ‘Your name is chosen’, me and my son. I was taken by a car. I walked for an hour. From this car l was passed to another car. The windows of the car were dark, we couldn’t see the outside. So l noticed that l was sold to that car. I didn’t see how much money was given to that man. I was brought into a bulding near to the water(l think she means a river) It was around 3 or 4 in the day when l was put into the building. The doorkeeper told me to wait for him till he comes back. Me and my little son, we were alone. There lots of drugs on the shelf, I thought to eat them to get rid of this situation. Then l thought that my son will be left here alone, what’s the good of it if my son leaves in their hand? I opened the window to jump out of it with my son. I saw some men outside and called them. They were shocked and turned to me. They came by doorkeeper but he didn’t let them go inside. They were told that ‘You have nothing to do here.’
After l was put in there, a doorkeeper was watching me, he was told to keep an eye on me. He went somewhere, l don’t know, he was busy with something. The door was not made of iron, it was a wooden door. I fiddled with the door by some iron and broke it open. The doorkeeper noticed me and came. He gave me the key to open the door from the inside. He asked me what l will do. I said ‘l will take my son to the toilet.’ I deliberately said so to be able to escape from there. I got the key to open the door but it didn’t open. Then he told me to give him the key and open the door. He tried as well but because l broke it down he didn’t manage to. He called his friend to open the door but it didn’t open again. I begged to the god to hear me. So till they went and take another person to open the door, l managed to open the door. I went downstairs because it was upstairs. I couldn’t understand where l was. I came down to the bottom, it was such a basement, and stayed there for about an hour. It was a place some people were working in. That time, l had a kerchief of Ivana, l had tied it to my back. I used it like a hijab and wore it. I just let my eyes be seen. I hold my son to my side. I nursed him and he slept. And l scared so much if it would be the night and he slept. I came by the chief’s door, l was out. I saw that the doorkeeper was in front of the door. I hid myself till he went and got busy with something. I held my son to my side and begged to the god. I walked and walked through the levee. Their spot was not far from me and l just passed beside it. I held my son and slowly left us down on a very small path beside to the water. So l was thinking that if they notice me, l will leave us down in the water. Or else we’ll manage to escape. So silently l passed by them. I saw a family that breaking fast beside to the water, it was Ramadan. I was crying. It was two brothers and their two families and three children. I was crying and sat down beside them. The man turned me an asked me if l am an Ezidi or not. I said ‘Yes l am.’ So he told me to sit down and covered me with her daughter’s hijab. He told me ‘Relieve your son, ISIS is far away, don’t afraid.’ But l was still scaring. So marrying or such kind of things, never, l haven’t experienced there. You know a doorkeeper was there to watch me but till the others came, thanks god that l managed to escape. That family helped me. They had their meals till it got dark, they took us to that family’s(they are given to another family) home with my son. I was told in the night that they won’t let me stay there too long. I was told that ‘3 in the night, l’ll give you one of the children’s identity and make you wear the cloths like we wear. And if we come across them, don’t talk. If you talk they’ll capture you.’ Though they weren’t Ezidis, god save them, they did whatever they could do for me. They got me till the side of PKK in Afrin and handed to PKK. I was put beside to an Ezidi family and l was told to relieve and get comfortable for 6 or 7 days. I stayed there for 2-3 days. It was 10 in the night, one of the members of PKK was prepared ready for me and they made me pass from the Syrian border to Turkish one. From 10 in the night until 3 am we walked and reached to the Turkish border. It was so so hard but thanks god that l didn’t fall into their hands.
I: Totaly, how long were you in their hands?
R: For one year and a month.
I: Thank you so much for telling us.
Those incidents that you’ve experienced, in what degree do they have effect on your health?
R: It is too much actually.
I: What kind of problems are these? In what respect do you have these problems.
R: No, l’m ok.
I: You’re ok? Till which degree do you have problems or not? Too much or little? For example, do you have pain in your body?
R: Thanks god that l’m good. I have no pain but sometimes l get distressed.
I: In what degree?
R: 2.
I: Do you have any pain in your body, have backache or headache?
R: No thanks god that l’m good.
I: Do you have any dermal problems?
R: No, l don’t.
I: Any problem with your movements; like you can’t walk well.
R: No, it’s ok.
I: Do you feel nauseous?
R: No.
I: Do you have difficulty in hearing?
R: No it’s ok.
I: Shortness of breath?
R: Rarely, when l am angry with the children. Or else, not.
I: Do you feel dizzy?
R: No, thanks God.
R: Problem wtih your hearth?
I: No.
I: Upset stomach?
R: No.
I: Do you have any other problem except for the ones that we ask you here?
R: No.
I: So there is no change in your health?
R: No, l am ok.
I: Have the incidents you’ve experienced affected the relation between you and the other people?
R: No no.
I: These incidents, do they affect your relation between you and the other Ezidis?
R: No.
I: After these incidents, do you think the Ezidis care you more?
R: Yes they help me. There is no difference between the ones captured and not captured.
I: Do these incidents affect your belief in God?
R: No not really.
I: So is it like before? I mean your belief hasn’t weakened or got stronger?
R: It’s the same, even got stronger.
I: What do you do to feel better, to relieve?
R: Actually l can not forget. There are still Ezidis in their hands. I’m going to the school, it makes me forget for a few hours or when l talk to somebody or busy with my children; it makes me forget those incidents.
I: What makes you happy or relieved more?
R: Going to the school, doing daily works.
I: Do you feel better when you meet or talk to somebody else?
R: We all are Ezidis, we do our work together, go together. These make me feel good.
I: In what degree do you feel better when you go out with your friends or other people?
R: That makes me feel good.
I: How much do you believe in yourself to get rid of these thoughts?
R: I trust myself.
I: Does praying help you?
R: It helps me so much. Thanks god that l didn’t fall into their hands.
I: Do you feel good when you are alone?
R: Yes, staying alone is mostly good for me.
I: Does forgetting those incidents or getting rid of those thoughts help you as well?
R: Yes they do as well.
I: Talking to a woman or a friend or one of your relatives on these issues help you (to feel good)?
R: Yes it helps me.
I: How much does seeing a doctor help you?
R: Actually, l haven’t seen a doctor.
I: But do you think that seeing a doctor will be good for you?
R: I haven’t thought on that. When l’m dealing with my children, l really feel good and comfortable.
I: How much will it help you if you stay among Ezidis?
R: I feel so good when l am among them.
I: Do you think that there are another ways to feel good?
R: If l reach my husband and if we all come together.
I: Do you take mental drugs?
R: Once l took it. Before these incidents, once l had a headache.
I: But not the drugs for headaches.
R: I got it, so let me tell you. Once l saw a doctor for my headache but l was told that it is mental problem. After using for 1 year, l gave up using the drugs.
That time l was in Iraq, my son Khalid was so small, around one year old, that l was in that situation. Now it is ’14(l think she means the year they are in) and thanks god that l’m well.
I: Those drugs were beneficial for you?
R: Yes they were.
I: Have you seen a psychiatrist?
R: Yes l have seen.
I: Did you go to see him for once or for a few times?
R: Two times. Once with my children, once with my brother-in-law’s son. I had an headache and he prescribed some medicine for me.
I: Did you tell him what the roblem was?
R: Yes, l said ‘l am scared and l have a fever and now l have a headache. I am distressed.’
I: Have you seen a religious person for your mental health?
R: No, l haven’t.
I: Have you ever taken herbal drugs?
R: No.
I: How much do the social responsible here help you?
R: For any kind of peoblem, s/he helps us. For example when one of us gets sick.
I: So you’re glad with her/him?
R: Yes l am. They do their best for us.
I: Have you seen the doctor of …2:14:13?
R: 2:14:30
I: So was seeing the doctor good for you, do they help you?
R: Yes it was.
I: In what degree, did they help you?
R: All were good. They did whatever they could.
I: But in what way was it helpful? The drugs that prescribed for you or talking to them?
R: By the drugs that prescribed.
I: Do you feel like seeing a mental doctor here?
R: No, l don’t feel like that.
I: We’ll ask you some questions and you’ll answer if these questions from now to 7 days ago has ever happened to you or not?
R: l had no problem actually.
I: In the last week, for how many times did you think or remember about those incidents?
R: 2:18:50...a girl from Kocho, now she has grown up, she was around 2 years old. We heard that she was killed by the plane. We got stressed again. What a pity.
I: Do you have difficulty in sleeping?
R: No.
I: Do you remember those incidents repeatedly?
R: When we hear about them, we get distressed.
I: How often do you remember?
R: Much.
I: Did it make you angry?
R: No, not really. We got distressed. She was so small, what a pity.
I: Did you try not to get distressed?
R: Yes I tried.
I: In what degree?
R: 2:21:09
I: Has it ever happened to you like, you want to forget it but it continuously comes to your mind?
R: Yes it happens.
I: In what degree?
R: Actually, ..(No anwer)
I: Do you ever feel like that all the things you lived is just a dream?
R: Yes sometimes.
I: Do you try to avoid those thoughts in your mind?
R: Yes l try my best.
I: Do you feel like that those incidents come as an image in front your eyes?
R: l don’t want to let myself go and see bad images. I try to avoid them. So yes rarely.
I: When you see these images, do you get angry or are you scared?
R: No, thanks god. I just get distressed.
I: Do you try not to lose your consciousness?
R: Yes l do.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, do you deal with something else to avoid them?
R: Yes l do that.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, do you care them or just you say ‘I don’t mind them’?
R: No, l’m not saying that ‘I don’t mind them.’
I: So it means little degree.
Do you ever feel like those incidents happened to you just yesterday?
R: No.
I: Any problem with sleeping?
R: No.
I: Does it ever happen like, just in a moment you remember all incidents and get distressed?
R: No l don’t have such a problem.
I: Do you think like l had better get rid of these incidents from my mind?
R: Yes.
I: In what degree.
R: Actually as far as l can do, l want to avoid them.
I: Do you have low concentration?
R: No it’s ok.
I: What do you concentrate on?
R: l want to concentrate on my school and l don’t want to think about anything else that will avoid me to concentrate on my school.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, do you sweat or get dizzy, get distressed, get upset, stomachache?
R: No.
I: Do you dream of those incidents?
R: Actually, l don’t dream at all.
I: Do you think that those incidents have made you more conscious or aware?
R: Yes, they made me more conscious.
I: When you are with your other women, do you say that ‘you don’t want to talk about these incidents anymore’?
R: Yes l always warn them, to forget those incidents.
I: So till which degree do you tell them not to talk about those incidents?
R: …
I: We thank you so much for answering the questions, it’ll finish soon.
R: My children are in the kindergarten, l have to take them so if it finishes in 10 minutes..
I: 10 minutes later you’ll have to leave or in 10 minutes you have be there?
R: No, when the questions are finished, l’ll go and take them.
I: What do you think about this project that the Ezidi women are brought here?
R: So it’s pretty good.
I: What are the 3 good points about this project?
R: We had no benefits in Iraq, that’s very good for us. The other one is we are allowed to see the doctor. …2:31:01
I: Any negative point?
R: No nothing.
I: What do you think about the future?
R: My children go to school and they know the language. They are so happy with their school they are so glad here.
I: So the questions are finished. Do you want to ask or say something?
R: No, thank you very much, you are tired too. It’s so nice of you. I’m so glad.
I: We thank you very much indeed for your help for us with your answers.