Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
	I: How old are you? 
	R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [111]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
I: How old are you?
R:My age,  I think I  am 39, something like that I believe. 
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
I: Are you married?
R: No I am not. 
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
I: Who lives with you here, from your family?
R: My sisters
I: How many of them?
R: I live with three of my sisters here, and mother. 
I: You live with you three sisters?
R: Yes, and my little brother. I have another brother from another mother who is married now. 
I: But who lives with you now?
R: I live with a brother and three sisters. 
I: Are they here?
R: Yes.
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
I: Can you read and write?
R: Yes, I do. I speak Arabic and now I am going to a course, I also speak German. 
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
I: How far did you go in school?
R: Six years. 
I: Did you finish sixth grade? 
R: Yes, I did. I finished primary school. 
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
I: DO you go to school here?
R: Yes, I am in a course now. 
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
I: Any job?
R: No. 
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
I: Are you seeking employment?
R: No, not until I finish my school. 
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
I: Did you work in Iraq?
R: I did house work. 
I: No, outside the house?
R: No. 
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
I: What is your religion? 
R: Yazidi. 
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
I: Which religious group do you belong to?
R: I belong to Yazidi group. 
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
I: What is important fro you in life?
R: The most important thing in life is Marriage, when you settle down and you have your own family. One becomes more comfortable. 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
I: What do you need most to rebuild your life?
R: Since, I am staying here, I would need to have steady job, family, and a normal life to jump over all the obstacles. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I: Now we have some questions, when we ask, you answer according to these pictures; like this is a lot and this little. 
R: I know it. 
I: how much control would you say you have over your life now?
R: I believe in myself, I can run my life. 
I: A number please?
R: Three. 
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
I: What do you think the future holds for you?
R: You know, I want my future to be good, 
I: That is what you want, but do you think it will be good?
R: I believe it will be good that God will give a better future. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
I: Assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?
R: Well, Iraq is nice too, but it depends on what will happen in the future, if I get married here, I will stay here, and if my husband and family are in Iraq, I will go and stay in Iraq. 
I: If they give you two options between living in Iraq and Germany, where would you rather live?
R: I will choose to stay here, here is better. 
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
I: Why Germany?
R: Germany is the best, people are comfortable, good, and people do not interfere in each other's affairs. 
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
I: How far do you feel that you are home here?
R: Until this degree. 
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
I: According to your experiences in the past two years in Germany, how would evaluate the life here?
R: Well, it is good, but you know one can never forget about what had happened to us. 
I: She means to what extent was it good?
R: It is good like until this moment it is good.  It is getting better as well.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: Why did you choose number 3?
R: Well I chose that become we are still of the process of settling down. We still need time to be fully recovered. 
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
I: If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?
R: I only want to see our people who are still captivity. 
I: About safety in Iraq? 
R: It is getting better, once the war is over people will start to live peacefully. 
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
I: What does the word justice mean to you?
R: I swear justice is ….
I: Where do you see justice? From which prospective?
R: I see it from humanitarian point of views, people must get their rights, as you what had happened to us, those dirty people must get punishments, and nothing must stop them from punishing them, not Islam nor anything else. 
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you that those people who committed atrocities against you are brought to justice?
R: It is very important. 
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
I: How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?
R: Well, day by day, I believe that God will bring our rights back. 
I: So do you believe, or to what extent do you believe that you will ever get justice?
R: I believe, to this degree. 
I: Can you give a degree? Please
R: I would say 1
I: But that means little 
R: Yeah, I have to witness it myself. I have beliefs that it will happen, but I want to see it myself. 
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: How important is it for you that ISIS are held accountable? 
R: Very important, 4. I want it very bad
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
I: Why do you want them to get punished?
R: They have committed extreme violent crimes against us, not only men, but against kids and women. They raped and killed a lot of girls. 
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
I: Who must be held accountable?
R: ISIS, from any groups or religions, any ISIS member either they are Kurds, Arabs, Yazidi, European or any. But mostly Iraqi ISIS members, they were those who committed crimes against us. 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
I: How should they be held accountable?
R: By the worst punishments ever, I don’t want them to get a normal punishment, but the worst one. We don’t want them to be killed immediately, but to be tortured and taste the death before they get killed. They deserve the worst. 
I: What is the worst punishment? 
R: About Justice?
I: No, we mean what is the worst punishemt?
R: To get them and burn them alive that they would wish to die, like killing them bit by bit. 
I: Do you mean to put them in prison and punish them or just put them in captivity?
R: I want them to experience the torture first. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence? 
R: Against whom? 
I: Against Yazidi, oh no; against ISIS, have you heard about anyone who made any effrots to make complaints?
R: We did that in Iraq in the federa Court, we gave our testimonies to announce what happened to us as Genocide. 
I: You did that in Iraq?
R: Yes. 
I: What about here in Europe?
R: Everywhere, people are trying to announce it as Genocide. People are trying in parliaments and everywhere.
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
I: Is it possible to forgive ISIS?
R: No way. 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
I: Is there anything that should be done before you forgive them or you will never be able to forgive them?
R: We will never forgive them. 
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
I: How important is it for you to know why had ISIS done that to you?
R: It is really important to know what had happened, it is also important to know why they had forced people to convert to Islam, we even had seen people who had converted to Islam, yet ISIS beheaded them. We would like to know why they would do that. They have always said that it is about religions. 
I: So is it important for to know why had they done that?
R: Yes, very important, I want to know.  To the 4th degree
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
I: How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about ISIS had done?
R: Yes, it is important. 
I: To what extent?
R: 4. 
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
	I: How important is it for the future generation to know what ISIS had done so that they don’t forget?
	R: It is important, I can say 3 or even 4. We want them to always remember what had happened to their ancestor.
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
I: Why is it important?
R: We always want them not to forget those dirty crimes. Those dirty crimes must not be forgotten, because they are, worse things will happen. And they do even worse to us. 
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
I: How will make sure that your future generations know about it?
R: By every means, we will tell them. 
I: By retelling you mean? What other means?
R: Like anything else, writing, telling others, media, books, … etc. Like those stories of Hitler, people know about it until now. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
I: There is a commission called Truth Commision that is organized by countires; have you heard about it?
R: What is it?
I: Truth commission?
R: No, I don’t know anything about it. 
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
I: It is a commission organized by the government of every country, it is a group of people that are assigned to investigate about the ethnic groups who were oppressed for a month or so; in the end, they prepare a report or protocol about what happened and give it to the government. Do you think it is good if something like this happen for Yazidi people?
R: Yes, it is good. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
I: What should be done to Yazidi victims of ISIS?
R: You know they need help, they have been through a lot. Some people have suffered 2 to 3 years in their captivity. 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
I: What should be done for Yazidi people in general?
R: There are many mass graves that are still undiscovered; many families are still waiting for their loved ones. There are many Yazidi people in Iraq who are in miserable situations. Many people have been rescued from ISIS and they are sick, they need medical aids. There are fatherless kids and girls. There are shattered families. Their tents are weary and old, they have been in the same tents for three years under rain and the sun.  We seek aids for them. Our villages are destroyed and mined, people can't go to their houses in their villages, they are mined, and many people have lost their lives when they tried to go back there. 
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
I: As an ISIS victim, do you see that people recognize you as a victim?
R: Yes
I: TO what extent?
R: To the 3rd degree. People recognize us as victims, no one can hide what had happened to us, and they were dirty creatures. They had taken babies and there are babies with women and no one knows are their fathers. They had raped 9 years old children or 60 years old women. They had sold same woman multiple times to different men. The obliged kids to do whatever they wanted, or else they would have killed them and tell them that they are infidels. 
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
I: As you said that you are recognized as ISIS victims, how do you know that?
R: It has been all over the TVs and in Parlaimants.
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
I: Do you think that there will peace and stability in Iraq?
R: I personally don’t think that. Iraq isn’t a safe place since the down of Saddam, if these are gone, a new group will appear. People make problems because they are busy with their political affiliation.
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
I: Do you think that there be will be in the Middle Eastern countries like Syria or other countries?
R: I don’t think. 
I: Arab countries?
R: No, Arabs are full of dirt and problems
I: So, no peace?
R: No. 
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
I: In your opinion, what changes should be done to build peace in Iraq? 
R: All Iraqis must unite, you see even Yazidi people are not united, since they are not united, there won't be peace. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
I: Do you know anything about the military forces who fight ISIS now?
R: Yeah, I know, but not much. There are some movements, but one doesn’t know clearly such as Peshmarga or Hashd units. They are fighting here and there, but we don’t know about them. 
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
I: Do you think that we can protect minorities such as Christians in Iraq and how can we protect them? 
R: We feel pity for Christians too, though they hadn’t been captured too much like Yazidis, their houses were destroyed and their families were shattered. They need to be protected too. 
I: Yes, but how can we protect their rights?
R: Like they do for Yazidis, they should do for Christians. 
I: You didn’t understand my question? I mean how can we protect the minorities?
R: There are not something called rights in Iraq. They brought us here because we hadn’t had any rights in Iraq. There girls who are alone now or with a child, so who would protect their rights there. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
I: Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences or did anyone ask you about?  
R: No, not here. Once, a lawyer came with Nadia Murad, they asked us to give them our consent to represent us in the court. Amal Colone came here once too.  Otherwise, not anyone else. Oh, another lawyer who came here from (Haidburg), she was dark-skinned and had bum on her head. I don’t remember her name. 
I: Rabiaa? 
R: Yes, Rabiaa came here a couple of times. They visit my sisters, but not frequently. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
I: Do you discuss it with other women here? 
R: With whom?
I: The women here, other Yazidi women?
R: The social worker?
I: No, other women like you in the camp?
R: Oh, well we all have same stories; we don’t talk about it that much. We don’t want to remember what happened. 
I: If you talk about it, how often do you talk about it?
R: Oh you mean how many times, not much. 
I: Once a week? Twice a week?
R: It depends, if people visit me once or twice a week, or may be sometimes once a month. 
I: With a psychological doctor?
R: here or there?
I: Here?
R: Just twice, I went to a hospital and talked with a girl. 
I: With a social worker?
R: Yes, twice when we first came here. 
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
I: With police, TV, newspaper or anything else?
R: No. 
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
I: Who was Rabiaa?
R: I don’t know? 
I: Have you talked with Amal Colone?
R: I haven’t talked to her personally, but she came here once and talked to us in general. 
I: Oh she talked to you all? 
R: Yes.
I: Did you understand why did she come here? Did she tell you that?
R: She came here as a visit. 
I: You didn’t know why did she come here?
R: No. 
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
I: Did she give you anything? 
R: Amal Colone? 
I: Yes.
R: No. Even when Nadia Murad came here, we barely saw her for seconds. 
I: Did you say that Nadia Murad is your relative? What is she to you?
R: She becomes the daughter of my father's aunt. Her mother and my grandmother (father's side) are sisters. We were neighbours too. 
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
I: Have you written about your experiences?
R: No, I haven’t personally, but in Iraq, they have written everything when we gave our testimony in courts and police stations. 
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
I: How often do you seek information about what happened? 
R: We do because there are always news things in buying captives from ISIS. 
I: Daily? Once a week? 
R: Not everyday, but we sometimes we ask about what's happening, not always. 
I: 
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
I: How do you get information? from TV or newspaper? 
R: I call my people in Iraq, I phone them. 
I: Do you seek information from social media? 
R: I do search on internet, but I don’t believe everything from facebook. 
I: Do you use TV and newspaper to get news?
R: I watch TV, but I mostly use phone to contact some people and get information from them. 
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
I: How do you and other Yazidi people here communicate each other? 
R: Sometimes, we use Viber or Whatsapp. We mostly use phones as we make the monthly package; calling and internet are free for 20 euros. 
I: Now we will take a rest, you can go and grab your phone. 
R: OK. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
I: We have some questions, you can answer the way you feel comfortable. If you feel that you don’t want to talk about something because they remind you of some sad moments, you don’t have to talk about them. 
R: OK I got it. 
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
I: Can you talk about the time when you were in captivity with ISIS? If you can talk about what happned during that time?
R: Do you want me to talk about it in general? SO you know the whole story. 
I: No, just your own story and experiences. 
R: Well, when they captured us, they took us to Tal'Affar, after a month there, I hid myself. Hoping that they wouldn’t take me. After that, they took to Syria. They brought buses at night, they put all of us in a house. On the following morning, they picked us, they separated us like women from girls.
I: Did they do that in Syria?
R: They took us to Raqaa. 
I: Where did they separate you?
R: In Tal'Affar. 
I: SO they separated you and took you to Syria. 
R: Yes, before then, they took other girls, but after a month, they took us too. 
I: They took them very early. 
R: Yes, they did. 
I: After they took you there?
R: Syria, they put us in a big house, it had several rooms, a kitchen, and abathroom. They put like 500 women and girls in it. They stuffed the rooms with women and girls. We were sitting on each others. Every day, they would take 10 people; I was there for one week. There was one relative boy with me, that boy I brought that boy with me to look like I am married woman. They had that system to take and separate children from women and their mothers. They took us to Silook on the borders of Syria, they took us with another woman and six children. They brought buses from 9:30 to 9 at night. 
I: After that? 
R: They put us in a school, there were 60 kids of ISIS, they were their kids, young biys were training for ISIS, our boys were around 60 too, the oldest one was 14 years old. We stayed there for 3 days. 
I: Who were in that school? Only 60 boys as total or 60 of ISIS and 60 of your boys? 
R: there were 60 boys whom ISIS had taken them from Muslim and Yazidi families, they were training them starting from 5:00 in the morning, the poor young boys had to wash their faces with cold water. After that, they told us that they would take us to another place, they took me to a house for two days, then one evening, one man came who was called Sheikh Sarmad he told me that he had sold me, I began to cry, I told him that I wanted the boy with me, he said that he would not leave him with me. 
I: Was the boy with you in the first place?
R: Yes, that Sheikh would take him for training and would bring him back to me in the afternoon. 
I: Were you alone in that house?
R: No, there were other 6 women with me. 
I: How long were you at the school?
R: Three nights, then the Amir came and told me that they had sold me. He was Tunisian. And there was also another Syrian Kurdish Guy with ISIS. 
I: How many nights were you at that house?
R: One night.
I: They sold you to a Saudi guy?
R: No he was Tunisian, he also spoke Arabic. 
I: Was the boy with you when they sold you?
R: Let me tell you the story, when they sold me and began to take me, I cried and they forced me into the car, the drove me for a bit, then they asked what did I want, I told them that I wanted the boy to be with me. We went back and they asked for the boy, the boy came with us. When the boy came to me, I felt very happy as I wasn’t in that terrible situation. We drove from 10 pm until the other day, they took us to Til Abyadh, they took us an empty place, and there was only a training site for making suicide bombers and other stuff. It was a place for high positioned people in ISIS. That man was in charge of training and making bombs, and he told that he had spent 5 years in Prison in Tunisia, he was training ISIS and he was making bombs. 
I: He was training ISIS in Tunisian prison? Wasn’t he a convict?
R: Yes, he was, he was in prison for five years. 
I: He was training ISIS members while he was in the prison?
R: Yes. He told that by himself, he wasn’t that old. He was about 32. When we arrived, he asked to wash up myself, I refused and rejected. He said that I had to convert to Islam; I still resisted refusing. He beat me and on the other day, he tied me with ropes and did that job with me. I stayed there for 2 months. After that, he was devolved to Libiya. 
I: To Libiya?
R: Yes. There were ISIS in Libiya too. 
I: What happened to you afterwards?
R: He gave me to another leader of ISIS. 
I: He gave you to him?
R: yes. He gave to another leader and told that he was free what to do with me, he sold me again to guy in Raqaa. He was 24, he was not that old. I was there for six days, and then he took me to Der Zoor. 
I: Did he give you to another one?
R: Yes, he gave me to another one that was from Raqaa, he took me to his parent's for four days, then he took me to Der Zoor, the place was called Haqil Al-omr. He put me in an apartment building, the pace was deserted. 
I: You were the only people there?
R: Yes. There were other 34 women in those apartments. Each one of us was in a private apartment. 
I: How long did you stay there?
R: We stayed there for a long time. It was very hard. We couldn’t go out. There were a lot of Libian ISIS members there. We stayed there until April. We didn’t have phones. We were in that field. That field was for weapons, they would take me like a month to the airport and another month back in the field. We were under airstrikes for two times at the airport. 
I: Which airport was it?
R: it was Der Zoor. 
I: Was he responsible for weapons?
R: Yes he was. He knew all about the weapons. Jets fired at us two times at the airports. One time, I stayed there for etwo months, once, there was a very heavy attack, but we came out safe. 
I: Was the boy with you?
R: Yes, he was. 
I: After that?
R: After that, I told him that I couldn’t go back to the airport, I told him I couldn’t for the sake of the boy, he told that he would sell me. There was a taxi driver who would take women to the hospital in the absence of ISIS, 
I: Was he working for ISIS?
R: He was, but he was forced to. He would take women to hospital and bring them back. There was that woman with two kids who gave a number to the taxi driver and he contacted that number, eventually he rescued them. 
I: The taxi driver?
R: Yes. One night I went to his house and told him to help me, I had previously given him my uncle's number, I asked to do something for us, he told that my uncle had called him and asked him rescue the boy and me from the field.  During a night, at 8:00 o'clock, he was performing a prayer, when they were praying; they would not cut the meditation after that. We left for a fairly far house. We went there.  We didn’t take off our black clothes. We put our clothes in a black plastic bag; they told us that we had to run. We told them that we would visit a patient. My uncle sent two messages. He told me that he would come and take us at 8:00. I told them I couldn’t. 
I: You went to the driver's house? 
R: Yes. I told them that if they would come at 6:00, it would be easier for me to run away because the ISIS guy would always pray and sleep until afternoon. On the other day, we waited at the gate, we spoke Arabic, we told them that we would go to the Hospital. The taxi came and took us to Iraq; my uncle came to Syria to take us. 
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
I: How long did you spend in captivity? 
R: I stayed there for 10 or 11 months. 
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
I: How has the time in captivity with ISIS affected your current health related well-being?
R: Very much. I was sick. They tortured us. Who would bear five times of that thing a night? Leave the night a side; they came on us during the day as well. It was all by force. Once in Tal Abyadh, they didn’t let me in the house for rainy days just because I mistakenly put benzene in the generator instead of the gasoil. I didn’t know recognize the colour of the gasoil, they said that I did that in purpose to set fire to the generator. I was left outside with no food and they didn’t let me to see the boy. I tell you this as well, you are like a close relative too, I did a surgery on this side of my body, and they did the surgery with no anesthetics. 
I: They did the surgery there?
R: Yes. They did in Tal Abyadh. 
I: After those two days?
R: Yes. I stayed there for a day in the hospital. They did all the bad things to us; they raped us with tools and stuff. They even raped me in front of that boy. 
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
I: Do you have other pains?
R: Yes, I do.
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
I: Do you have skin problems?
R: No I don’t, but I have issues with my blood, I was diagnosed and treated, I am still in the process of the treatment. I don’t have any problems with my skin. Nothing at all with my skin. I was very thin though. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
I: Do you have movement problems?
R: No I don’t any problems, but I do have batteries in my heart, I planted them when I was a child. 
I: Oh you have had them when you were a kid? 
R: Yes. Since Iraq. It was before 15 years, they told me one of my vessels didn’t work properly, so they planted a battery in my heart. When I came here, they changed it. It is very small but very effective. 
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
I: Do you sometimes feel unconscious or faint?
R: No, I don’t.
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
I: Do you have problems with your ears or nose?
R: No, I don’t.
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
I: Do you have feelings of suffocations?
R: No, I don’t. Not really. 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
I: Dizziness?
R: No. 
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
I: DO you have problems with your heart? That it thrumbles fast?
R: No, I don’t, it is normal. 
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
I: Any problems with your stomache or guts?
R: No
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
I: Do you have any other problem? 
R: No. 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
I: What do you think it is the reason behind these problems?
R: From the sadness, oppression, war, and other stuff. 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
I: Do you think what happened to you was a result of psychological causes?
R:
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
I: Do you think that the psychological causes are behind your body problems?
R: Yes, when one gets sad, things happen after that. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
I: Do you think that there is another cause like someone had spelled a magic on you?
R: I don’t know. 
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
I: DO you think that what happened to you was a punishment from God?
R: Sometimes, I think so, I say God has destined for us to be like this. 
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
I: How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?
R: Not actually. We have never seen anything bad from other people. Instead, people respect us and show us that we matter here. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
[too much noise and baby cries in the background] 
I: Did it affect your relationships among people in Yazidi community?
R: No, it didn’t. 
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
I: DO you think you have been excluded from the Yazidi community or they help you?
R: We are good, we don’t have any problems, they help me. 
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
I: What have you seen from the violence affected your faith?
R: No, it didn’t, we will never  give up what we believe in?
I: Better or less now? 
R: it is firmer now. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
I: How do you cope with what have you seen from ISIS?
R: Well, I try to busy myself. 
I: But how? What are the ways? 
R: I try making myself thinking about getting married and having kids or getting a job. Though, I will never forget, if our prisoners return home, it would make our life better.  
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
I: In your normal life, what do you do to make yourself better or for a relief?
R: I try to make myself busy with the phone, with a friend, visit a city, or go out. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
I: DO you believe that getting together and gather in one place with people who have similar situation will help you to ease your sadness?
R: A lot. 
I: How much?
R: This. 
I: Oh, if you say one that means little. 
R: No, I mean a lot. 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
I: How much does it help you that you think you are a strong person?
R: Yeah it does. 
I: How much?
R: 4. 
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
I: Does praying help you? The Yazidian prayers? Do you pray right?
R: Not prayers, we say prayers and some worship practices. Our ancestors taught us something. 
I: it is about the names, we say different stuff and you say others. Anyways, does it help you? To what extent does it help you?
R:  I see you mean how it does help to make us feel comfortable, a lot, it is a 4. 
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
I: Does it help you to be alone?
R: yeah it does. 
I: How much?
R: 3. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
I: Does it help you to avoid things that remind you of ISIS and the violence you had experienced?
R: Yes, it does. 
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
I: Does it help you when you talk about it with others? 
R: Yes, the the third degree. 
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
I: Does it help you when you go to a doctor? 
R: Yes, 3. 
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
I: Does it help you when you are with Yazidi people? 
R: Yes. 
I What degree?
R: 4. 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
I: Do you have any other strategies to cope with your problems? 
R: I would like to ask more about my religion and have more knowledge. 
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
I: Have you ever taken psychological pills? 
R: No I haven’t. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
I: Have you seen any psychologists here in Germany? 
R: No, I haven’t seen any doctors for medications; I told you before that I have gone to a woman twice. I just talked with her. 
I: This is what we mean, it is a psychological therapy, 
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
I: Were you alone?
R: Yes, but there was a translator with me. 
I: Did it help you?
R: Yes, 
I: How much?
R: 3, it is always better to reveal what is inside you. 
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
I: Did you go to a religious Sheik (cleric) for seeking help?
R: No I haven’t. 
I: Did you go in Iraq?
R: Yes we did, there were sheikhs, religious me, and others.
I: How much did it help?
R: It helped a lot. They told us that we have no sins for what happened to us. 
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
I: Have you ever taken herbal medicines?
R: No at all. 
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
I: Does the social work help you?
R: yes, a lot for appointments and doctors. They do their best. 
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
I: Have you seen any doctor in Germany?
R: yes. 
I: Did it help?
R: Yes, they did, they are always helpful.
I: What degree?
R: 4
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
I: How much the psychologist helped you? And how? 
R: I talked to her, she was writing on some papers. 
I: Just listened to you. 
R: Yes. 
I: How did she help? 
R: I just talked to her. 
I: SO she didn’t help you that much?
R: Well, it was just talking. 
I: How much?
R: it is just a 2. Not that much. 
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
I: Do you think that there is a psychological treatment that can help you but you haven’t received it yet?
R: No, I don’t think so. I am almost good when it comes to my psychology. I am comfortable. 
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
I: We will tell you about some problems, tell us by degrees if they happened to you within the past seven days. 
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
I: During the past seven days, have you thought of the things that happened to you and made you sad? 
R: Yes, do you know why; one of my sisters is still in their captivity and she has a baby daughter; the other day, there was an airstrike on them, I think it has killed her daughter. It is all mourn at our house again. 
I: A recent airstrike?
R: Yes, she is now in Syria, she is there with her three kids. 
I: How bad was it for you?
R: Zero degree?
I: Zero means that it didn’t affect you. 
R: No to this degree 2. 
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
I: Did you have sleeping problems because of that? 
R: Yes, I haven’t slept the other night when our uncle told us about her. Otherwise, I am good with sleeping. 
I: How are you now?
R: I am good. 
I: What degree? 
R: This. 
I: you have to give a lower degree for this. 
R: Ok. I am good I sleep early and wake up early. 
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
I: Is there anything else that reminds you of it?
R: No nothing. 
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
I: During the past week, did you get angry?
R: No I am good in that matter. I am a patient person. If I ever get angry, I don’t bring it out. Is it done?
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
I: If you think about it, you try not to get sad?
R: Yes, what is gone is gone. 
I: How much? Can you control yourself?
R: yes, 3 
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
I: Did it happen to you that you thought about it but you didn’t mean to?
R: Yes, it did. It is always like this. 
I: What degree?
R: 2
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
I: Did it feel a dream?
R: Yes, sometimes we say that it was like a dream not real. 
I: Which degree?
R: 2.
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
I: Did you try to stay away from thinking about it?
R: Yes. 
I: What degree?
R: until degree, I don’t want to repeat thinking. 
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
I: Do pictures about it pop in your mind, pictures that remind you of it?
R: Yes. Many times, when we think about it.
I: what degree?
R: until 3
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
I: When those pictures pop in your mind, do you get any jumpy and startled?
R:  Yeah, before a while I had those pictures like mosnters coming at me and getting bigger. My uncle made an amulet for me from a religious person, it helped a lot and now I don’t see those pictures.
I: In the past week, did you get jumpy and starled?
R: No. 
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
I: Do you try not to think about it?
R: Yes,
I: How much?
R: 4
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
I: Do you ever feel that you are getting a huge wave of feelings, but you don’t deal with it?
R: Yeah.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
I: Did it happen to you that when you think about it you feel numb? Like it doesn’t affect you?
R: Yeah, you know everything is meaningless. 
I: What degree? 
R: I say to the degree 3. 
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
I: Did it happen to you that you feel that what happened to you was like yesterday? 
R: it happened.
I: During the past seven days?
R: no. 
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
I: During the past days, did you have sleeping problems?
R: No. 
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
I: During the past days, did you feel sadder than other days like stronger feelings tna usual?
R: No, just a little bit about the girl. 
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
I: Did it happen to you that you got some memories, but you tried to remove it from your memory?
R: Yeah whenever I get something in my memory, I try to remove it very soon. 
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
I: Did you have trouble concentrating? 
R: No.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
I: Did you get sad to the extent that you got sweating?
R: No. 
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I: Dreams about it?
R: No. 
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
I: You were watchful?
R: No. 
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
I: Did it happen to you that you tried not to talk about it?
R: No. I don’t want to talk about it. 
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
I: Thanks a lot for you, just a little bit remained. 
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
I: In your opinion, what positive thoughts do you have in Germany? 
R: In Iraq, … 
I: No, here in Germany, you have been here since two years, what positive things can you say about here?
R: Well, I am getting better day by day. I can go out and adapt the lifestyle here. 
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
I: What degree do you give to this program that brought you here?
R: I give it 4, it is very good.
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: Can you say three points about this project?
R: The first thing they brought here
I: Two
R: They are very good with us. 
I: Three?
R: They are always good with us and they do their best with us. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
I: DO you have anything negative about it?
R: No nothing, we cant say anything other than good things. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
I: What gives you hopes for the future? 
R: I want a better future. 
I: What gives you that hope that you think the future will be better?
R: I have many things in my heart, I want that I can get better and developed, I want to get married, and establish a family. The best thing is when you have a friend who is in Iraq and he comes here to join me. 
I: For marriage?
R: yes
I: We are done now, do you have anything to add?
R: Thanks a lot for listening to us and caring about our story. We just want our rights to be given to us. 
I: We try to collect this information to raise your voice and bring your rights back. You were very good in sharing information and answering. You have said a lot of important points. 
R: I thank you too.