FILE: 114
I: How old are you?
R: 24.
I: Where is your children?
R: Here, we’re togother.
We have a child. After l arrived here Germany we got married, next month it’ll be one year.
I: Thank you so much (She’s talking to somebody else).
With how many people are you staying home?
R: Me and my children.
I: You.. how many.. ?
R: It’s been 3-4 months that we moved to this house.
I: You know how to read, right?
R: Yes.
I: Did you go to school in Iraq?
R: For 5 years.
I: Here, do you go to the school?
R: Yes, I do.
I: Do you work?
R: No.
I: Are you looking for a job?
R: No, l can’t.
I: Why can’t you work? Because of your children?
R: Yes, they are still young.
I: Why did you even bother, thank you.
Before ISIS did those things to you, did you work?
R: No.
I: What is your belief?
R: Ezidi.
I: What is your ethnicity? Kurd, Ezidi, Arab?
R: l am Ezidi.
I: What are you hoping for now?
R: If my family is rescued from ISIS.
I: And what do you need here in Germany?
How many member of your family are in the hands of ISIS?
R: 7.
I: Whenever you have diffuclty in telling us, feel free please, you don’t have to tell.
R: Ok.
I: What do you need now in Germany to be able to start a new life?
R: We need to be secure. If we are far away from muslims, if nobody torments us, if we stay away from people like ISIS.
I: We’ll ask you some questions and you’ll answer like ‘l am bad’, that is 0 and ‘l am fine’, that is 4.
R: Ok.
I: Do you manage to handle your life?
R: 3
I: What do you think about your future?
R: A good family; not a family like in Iraq, (the possibility of)after two days my children are taken away from me or be killed. I always dream of a beutiful family.
I: Why do you want to stay here?
R: Because here we are in secure.
I: Do you consider Germany as your country?
R: 3. Because we’ve experienced lots of bad incidents in Iraq.
I: What do you think about Germany? I mean did you experience goodness, badness? With its laws, people, all?
R: Very good, 4.
I: Why?
R: Because Germany cares about us so much, they let us come here, helped to rescue us. 
Especially this village cares us so much, they accept us as we are their family, in every feast they visit us. Thet’s why.
I: If one day you turn back to Iraq, what should be changed or what there should be that you can live there in secure?
R: The most important point is there should not be muslims in our village. Before ISIS, we used to live together.
I: :What is justice for you personally?
R: Those who raped me, seperated me from my family; if one day they are judged.
I: How important is it if justice is served?
R: Very much.
I: Do you believe..?
R: Not at all.
I: How important is it for you if those who did so are judged and sentenced?
R: Very much. 
I: Why?
R: It’s not only me and my family that seperated from their families or their children were killed. Thousand of families have experieced the same thing. 13-14 year old girls, even younger, have raped.
I: Who are the people that must be punished? The leaders in ISIS, all ISIS or the muslims?
R: As far l’ve seen, when l was in the hands of ISIS; one of them was the army friend of my brother and for hundreds of times he came to have meal in our home. He seperated us from each other and raped my little sister. So from our neighbours to the commander, all of them.
I: How should they be punished? They should be killed, executed or judged in the court?
R: They must be judged by the court.
I: Have you ever heard that members of ISIS are sentenced or judged?
R: In Iraq, no.
I: Could you forgive these cruel people?
R: No.
I: What should be done so that you can forgive them?
R: l can’t.
I: How important is it to know what’s being done against ISIS or for the one captured?
R: Now it’s so important to know the situation of the people captured; which one was killed, which is alive.
I: How important is it for you if the world hears about the massacre on you?
R: Very much.
I: How important is it for you that your children, your grand cildren know about this massacre and what happened?
R: Very important and l hope it won’t come back anymore.
I: What should be done to write down this massacre as a history? In your opinion, a book sould be written down, a program be done not to let it forget?
R: Every word of our girls should be a book to let thousands of people read it.
I: Have you heard of a commission of truth?
R: No.
I: Iraqi goverment will send a commission to search about you, this commission will write down everything with dates. For example; ‘On this day ISIS came here, the other day this girl was raped, and so on.’ After that, the commission will give all the things recorded to the government to judge ISIS. Do you think that is something good?
R: There a few Ezidi MPs in the parliament of Iraq but nobody believes them.
I: But you think that is good?
R: Yes but if it is believed.
I: You are a victim too. What can be done for the ones who captured by ISIS and then escaped?
R: They need psychiatrist.
I: And what can be done especially for the Ezidis, who are in Shengal?
R: They should get out of Iraq.
I: Do you consider yourself as a victim of ISIS?
R: l think l am stronger than before. After l escaped and made my little sister escaped from them, l feel that l’m stronger. I always say the atrocities that ISIS made us go through are enough, we’ve had enough.
I: Do you value yourself? Do the people around you value you?
R: It doesn’t matter that much if they value me or not but l value myself.
I: How much?
Do you believe that one day the war in Iraq will stop?
R: If Ezidis and christians get out of Iraq, it will stop. Because muslims have always fought against Ezidis and christians.
I: To what extent do you believe that the war will stop in Iraq?
R: I don’t believe in that.
I: What do you think about arabian countries like Afghanistan, Pakistan (though these 2 countries are not arabian, the interpretor use that word but she may mean ‘muslims’) that one day there will be peace or not?
R: The situation has always been like that.
I: What can be done in Iraq to make the war stop?
R: Muslims in Iraq consider themselves more precious than the others. If people are equalized then the war can stop.
I: Have you heard that the armies of these countries are struggling against ISIS? The Iraqi army or the Kurdish army?
R: Yes.
I: Is this good?
R: Yes.
I: What can be done there to save the Ezidis, christians?
R: If all of them are seperate of each other and if each has its own liberty. Or else even if you’re living in another city, somebody else can command on you if you don’t have you own liberty.
I: So you mean there should be law for humanity.
R: Yes.
I: How often do you talk to your friends, children or the people around you about your situation?
R: Once in London, once in France, it’s been written down twice in Germany and in Iraq about 20 times it’s been written down.
I: And with the people here; whenever you come together, your talkings are on ISIS?
R: My children get angry, they are telling me to get rid of those thoughts and to start a new life.
I: So you’re not talking on them everyday?
R: No. Twice or thrice a month.
I: Who are you talking to?
R: To my friends, l have some friends here as well that staying in this Heim (the camps where refugees stay).
I: Did you go to see a psychiatrist?
R: …28:20
I: With your social responsible?
R: …28:25
I: Did you talk to anybody from the media, television?
R: Yes, in Iraq.
I: In London, to whom did you talk?
R: To some MPs.
I: And in France?
R: It was not somebody from the government. It was an Ezidi group that talked to me. And to some from Emirates as well.
I: Who were these people?
R: It’s some kind of an organisation. They write down the incidents that people experience, like an organisation of law. I talked to them and they wrote down.
I: Is it some kind of a justice court?
R: They were just recording not to let anything be lost.
I: Did you personally go there?
R: Yes.
I: Did they publish your words?
R: Yes, on Tv and newspapers it was published.
I: Did you personally write anywhere?
R: No.
I: Since you are here in Germany, how often do you follow the news to know about the genocide on Ezidis?
R: Every day.
I: Why?
R: Because my family is also captured, and to get an information on what is going on there.
I: Where do you follow the news?
R: On facebook.
I: By which means do you talk to your family?
R: By facebook or whatsapp
I: Dou you send SMS?
R: Yes l do.
I: Do you call them by phone?
R: Rarely.
I: By radio? Actually l have never heard that it could be spoken by radio.
R: No.
I: We want to talk little bit about what happened to you. If it is difficult to tell or you don’t want to tell everything, you are not forced to tell us. You can start from wherever you want. For example, where were you captured, how long did you stay in their hands, how did you escaped?
R: On the 3rd of August l was captured, all the Ezidis were captured on that day. Me and my family, we were captured all together; my married brother, mum and dad, my younger brother, my 14 year old sister and a 11 year old one and my brother’s three children. And my three brothers; 4, 5 and 6 years old. We all were captured together.
I: On the Shengal mountain? While you were escaping, were you captured?
R: Yes. That friend of my brother, he came and captured all of us.
I: Did you recognize him?
R: Yes.
When we were captured we were separated from eachtother; they separated we women from the men; my brother, my dad and my little brother. We heard some booming sound and thought that they were definitely killed. After a few hours we were told that we’d be taken to their chief in Shengal and let us know that if we become muslim, they’ll let us live. Me, my mum, my sister and my brother’s three children and my married brother were taken all together. My brother and my dad stayed. After that, my brother and my dad were also brought our side.
I: So you’re saying you all got together with your brother and father again?
R: Yes, for a 4-5 hours we stayed in Shengal and had no information about them, we thought that they were killed for sure but then we all came together. After they were brought next to us, the women and men were separated from eachother. Their hands and eyes were tied. They were put into a room, we were put into another one. In the evening, we all taken to the yard with the children. It was summer and hot. We were strictly warned not to move. Until 6 or 7 pm we all women stayed in the yard and they were coming to the yard to check us. All of a sudden some came by cars. They made everybody stand up and laid down their hands on my sister and wanted to take her. I didn’t let her go and my sister fell. After that, I and my 14 year old sister were taken forcibly and my 12 year old sister stayed with my mum. We 26 girls were put into a car and taken to Mosul, somewhere like a forest. It was like a touristic place in Mosul. While they were taken us there, they were holding our hands to prevent us from escaping. We all were put into the base and they told us to give them the jewelleries we have. We had nothing because they already took all the things we had when they captured us. But l had my phone. I had put it into my socks. I didn’t give it to them. I said ‘if they notice, let them kill me.’ For 15 days we stayed in that base. Every evening they were coming there to make us read the Qur’an. One of their chiefs was beating by a stick the ones who hadn’t read Qur’an. Once My brother managed to escape and l had talked to him. I asked them if they escaped or were captured. One of my friends was killed by ISIS, she had talked to her children. Her children were safe. In every 2-3 days we were talking to somebody to ask them if they were safe or not, if they were alive or not. One of the women wanted to talk to her father. He told us that one of his friends joined the ISIS, he can rescue us. He told us that ‘l can save only three of you and not more.’ He told us to be ready on that day. He gave us the phone number of his friend that he mentioned before and we talked to him and he wanted us to give him our names. A few hours later our names were called and they wanted us to get up. Each time, one of us would go. Me, my sister and that girl were taken. One of them checked us if we have anything on us or not. They found my phone. They told us that ‘The man that you talked to is our friend.’ After that, they left each of us in separate rooms without any food and water for 3 days and they beat us. In the evenings, without any bed or blanket we were sleeping on the ground. After 3 days, they took us into the center of Mosul, to the bazaar of Ezidi girls and women. We stayed there for 2 days. But not all the women were there, only till 40 year old women. If women have children, they were staying with their children. Everyday men were coming from Syria, Iraq, Mosul. From each region, one Emir was coming; from Syria, Mosul, Shengal. People were coming and had a seat. Each time, they were calling us to pass in front of them. And when pass, they wanted us to unveil our head because we all were covered. And they told us ‘Let your breast be seen, you need to stand upright, let them look all part of your body.’ We stayed in that situation for 3 days and on the 4th day that Emir from Baac bought 150 girls including me as well. We stayed in Baac, between the borders of Syria and Baac, for 2 days. Anybody came there too and bought for himself. One of my friends from the village, Ciran, she killed herself there. That Emir made me, my sister and a few girls get up and told us ‘l bought you.’ And he took me, my sister and 5-6 girls to his quarter. Before the day we passed there, one of our friends was raped. Then they came by us and passed us some dessert, they celebrated it, they told us ‘We got one of you.’ Me and my sister, we stayed there for 2 days, on the 3th day he raped my little sister. I heard her and could hear her sobbing. My sister was underage, she was 14 years old. He threatened me to give one of his doorkeepers, he was black like Africans. He was cooking and he was old, around 70. He told me ‘l will give you him or else l will separate you from your sister.’ I went to the kithen and took some drugs to kill myself. I fell down and couldn’t move at all. …54:24 He brought me home and raped me. I couldn’t move and he raped me.
I: That 70 year old man?
R: Yeah. All the girls there were raped and everybody took one(girl). We stayed in that house. We forced to get up early, cook for them, wash their clothes. We were obliged to cook for about 50-60 people and wash their clothes and do all their works. Then l, my sister and another underage girl, 14, were separated from the others; we were taken to another house. There were some other captured people in that house, they were men and tied. ISIS dressed them up with their clothes. We were not allowed to see them. So we didn’t know if they were Ezidis or not. We were told to cook them(for the captured ones) as well. When they were going to the toilet or bath, we were locked in the room, we weren’t allowed to see them. There were lots of people, about 800 people. We weren’t allowed till they go to the toilet and back to their rooms. About 2 months we stayed there and then we were taken to the court in Mosul. We girls all were taken to the court to solemnize us for each man. In the court session, lots of girls were being exchanged. These girls were taken for 2-3 months and inside of the court these people were exchanging or giving the girls to each other.
I: They were being sold or exchanged?
R: Both.
I: Was it some kind of a contract?
R: We were taken to a mosque in Mosul. A molla with a long white beard was there, he told us we are compelled to convert to Islam, they also wrote us documents and he would sign on them.
I: So it meant that you became a property of this ISIS member anymore?
R: Yes. After staying there for 2 days, we were taken back to their homes. It was again the same works. Sometimes they were bringing some herds of sheep and telling us to care them and we did the house work. Sometimes they beat us without any reason or raped us twice-thrice a day. l, my sister and another young girl, we were staying together. l and my sister were sold once but the other girl was sold to two different people. One day, some came from Syria. They told us that ‘We’ll sell three of you, we are bored of you.’ Those Syrians went but told us that ‘We will be back 3 days later and take you’; me, my sister and that girl. 1 or 2 days after that, they made us got up early and told us to clean the house well. We always used to cover ourselves with hijab. They told us that ‘We have a very important guess today.’ The table was set for them. We were told to make the salad and water ready. They were standing just next to us to check if we put something(bad) into their salad. I asked him, the man that took me, ‘Who’s come?’ He said ‘l will tell you but don’t let this person know. He is our Emir, Ebu Bekir Bagdadi.’ After 2 o’clock he came by us, l mean he came to another room. We were seeing him through th window. The meal was brought for him, he had the meal and then he took all Emirs with him.
I: Where did he take them?
R: He took them to Syria to attack somewhere. After all Emirs went, only that man-the one who took me- stayed at home. In the evenings he used to take some pills and he didn’t used to wake up. For a few times, l went inside his room, opened and closed the door and he didn’t notice it. My sister and the other girl was about to sleep in the other room, l told them not to sleep and we would escape. They were afraid so much telling me ‘He’s gonna kill us.’ I said ‘Dying is better than staying in their hands. The door was locked. I got a knife from the kitchen and broke the lock down. I took my sister and my friend. I took his gun and hid it under the sofa and took his phone. His phone was of an Ezidi boy. I took his other phone, hid it too and we went out of the house. When we were out, 6-7 dogs came to attack us, we couldn’t get rid of them till we went into a place in the yard. After we walked a while, l had recorded my brother’s phone number, l called and asked him if anybody could let us go. My brother send me the number of Khelil Shekhdir(?). He was a Shekh from Siba. He was killed, after we were escaped, on the 3th of April. He was going to pick up the ones who escaped. They(ISIS) always fighted with him. We called him and he said to us that he would give us a signal to let us see and we’d directly head for it. But for about 2-3 hours he was far away from us. He gave us the signal, we started to go, it was too far. When we got near to the signal, it was nearly in the morning. It was between the ISIS and him. After we noticed that the signal is among them, we went back to our place. Two ISIS member saw us. They chased us and we ran. They didn’t mean to kill us, they knew that we were girls; they capture us and do whatever they want with us but they don’t kill us. They were insistently behind us. We hid ourselves behind some houses till we got rid of them. We kept walking. Once we went into their quarter. We went back to get out but they noticed us, all went outside and fired the guns. We hid ourselves behind a house till we got rid of them. We went into a field that fenced and circled by spines. It was a field of olive trees. My friend told me to climb the trees but l refused because they would see us. They were looking for us by their cars. We kept walking, never stopped. We reached the road Qerich. When we reached the road some Ezidis saw us. When those Ezidis called us, we afraid so much, we thought that they are ISIS too. Because when ISIS call us, they call us in Kurdish, not in Arabic. And because they(the Ezidis that she saw) had been on the mountains for 2-3 months, they grew beard. But then one of them mentioned my brother’s name and said ‘He told us to come and take you.’ After he said so, we went beside them. After staying with them for a day, YPG(Kurdish forces) took us. For 6-7 days we stayed in an Ezidi’s house, they were our relatives. There wasn’t any way, between Shengal and Kurdistan. All of my brothers went to Kurdistan and they were safe. Then my brother came to pick us up and we went to Duhok.
My brother with his family and my younger brother all were staying in a school. There was no other place to stay in. We stayed there for 3 days and the police officers told us ‘You have to come with us.’ They took us forcibly, we were afraid so much. We were talking and they were writing down. But the chief of them didn’t believe us, saying ‘You are with ISIS or else you could not get rid of them that easily, you came here to gather information and send them.’ For 3 times the officers took us from the school and investigated us, they kept saying to us ‘You are not telling the truth.’ We were afraid so much and thought ‘Would they arrest us like ISIS?’ We went our sister’s home, they were living in Qalasura, away from Erbil. After that, we stayed their home. We stayed there for 3 months. ISIS had taken our identities. We used some other names, we didn’t get any identity but when somebody called us, we were telling them to call us by another name. We were afraid and thought that the security officer would arrest us. The ones in Duhok scared us too much.
I: When you were solemnized, was it your real name?
R: Yes.
After staying for 3 months at my sister’s home, we passed to the camp Ashariya, it is just on the border. Tents were set. l, my sister and brother passed into a tent. Because my sister’s house was too small. They were 3 people and their child was too young and another family was staying with them. We didn’t want them to get bored. At first, we had nothing. The day before passing to the camp, l and my sister slept on the same bed but my brother hadn’t any bed. We stayed there for 3-4 days. The neighbours brought us some stuff. One brought us some cloths, another brought dishes.
I: Which name did you use?
R: We were enrolled by our real names in the camp. Because when we went to the camp, we saw that there were some other girls who escaped from ISIS. In the camp, it was our real names. Sometimes food or blanket were given to us. For about 7-8 months we stayed in the camp and after that, my mum was escaped. After my mum escaped, l ...1:19:33 with Dr Mirza. We went to enroll our names. Dr Mirza told us ‘l will take three of you. I can’t take your brother.’ My mother said ‘Four of us need to come, l could’t leave my son here.’ Then they tell us ‘It doesn’t work.’ They didn’t consent to it, he was 20 years old. They said ‘He can not come with you.’ He didn’t fall into the hands of ISIS. Three of us enrolled our names.
I: Was your mother with you?
R: Me, my sister and mum.
I: You all came here?
R: My mum didn’t come here. The organisation didn’t accept my sister and mum.
I: With whom did you come here?
R: I came here alone.
I: Have your sister and mum experienced the same atrocity?
R: As a result of undergoing such an atrocity in the hands of ISIS, my mum can’t walk now and my sister was raped. She is traumatised now, sometimes she falls, she is in the camp.
I: Why didn’t you bring her with you?
R: It wasn’t accepted. If my sister came here, somebody had to be her guarantor and we had nobody here. And if your little sister goes, you have to go with her. And my mum can’t walk so one of us have to stay with her.
I: Where did you find your family (But most probably the interpreter asks how she met her husband)?
R: We both met each other in Iraq. He arrived here 2-3 months ahead of me. After l came here, we …1:21:38.
I: How long did you stay in the hands of ISIS?
R: About 3 and a half month.
I: Thank you so much for telling us. We were so sorry for you and it is difficult for us too. But we’re so happy that you managed to escape because you know there are still some captured people in their hands for 2-3 years. They are in such a bad situation, yours is 3 months, thanks god that you escaped earlier.
I: So you’ve undergone lots of atrocities, how much has it caused you suffer? Your psychology, your health?
R: I can’t move most of the time. I tell it to my doctor as well.
I: Is it psychological?
R: Yes.
I: Do you have any pain in your body because of these atrocities?
R: No
I: How much do they cause you break down? To much or little?
R: Fair.
I: 2?
R: Yes.
I: Do you still have pain?
R: No.
I: Does your skin itch?
R: No.
I: Do you have difficulty in walking?
R: No.
I: Do you fall or feel dizzy?
R: Since l arrived here, no but In Iraq l used to fall down.
I: After you escaped, how often did you feel dizzy?
R: Too many times. When l felt dizzy and fell, l couldn’t recover for a whole day. I used to stay for a whole day till l recoverod.
I: So how often? Once a day?
R: Not everyday. But when l felt dizzy, it was so heavy.
I: 3 or 4?
R: 3.
I: Do you have any problem with your eyes, your ears or in breathing since you escaped?
R: Before l escaped from ISIS, this eye, one of the Emirs punched in my eye, it was aching a lot but not now.
I: It is like you have shortness of breath?
R: Yes.
I: In what degree?
R: 3.
I: Do you feel dizzy?
R: Yes. Most of the time when l lie on the bad, l feel dizzy. Not when l’m walking.
I: In what degree?
R: 3.
I: Do you have pain in your heart?
R: If l am depressed too much.
I: 4?
R: 3.
I: Do you have stomachache?
Since you escaped, how much did you get harmed? Is there anything else?
R: No, only l’m traumatised.
I: Why do you think that you’re traumatised?
R: When l sleep with my husband, l remember the moment that l was together with that ISIS member. And l can’t tell him, it is difficult for him as well. But when we stay like that, l get distressed.
I: Do you think that it is because of your psychology?
R: Because l’ve undergone atrocities.
I: Did you feel dizzy before you were captured by ISIS.
R: I was fine before.
I: When you feel dizzy, do you think that it is because of a something bad?
R: Feeling dizzy is a result of thinking too much. In the nights l don’t sleep well. My little sister is still captured, l’m thinking of her.
I: Do you think that all these incidents are because of god?
R: No, thanks god that l escaped.
I: What about attitudes of people towards you? Have these changed?
R: It is like before. I can say it’s even better now.
I: Why is it better?
R: …1:29:57 how they lost and got captured.
I: Have the attitudes of Ezidis towards you changed or your relation is still the same?
R: No, it has not changed.
I: Do they care you more or they just don’t mind you?
R: They help me.
I: Your faith in god has got stronger or have you lost faith in him?
R: I believe in god more, l believe in Meleke Tawis (the sacred angel for Ezidis) too.
I: You’ve undergone lots of atrocities, how do you bear? How do you spend your day?
R: I’m saying if l just lie on the bed and do nothing, my life will be worse. I need to get up. When l feel so distressed, l’m going for a walk or talk to one my friends to forget myself and then l come back. Afternoon l’m going to take my course. That makes me feel better.
I: When you feel dizzy or have shortness of breath, what do you do to decrease them?
R: l go out.
I: What else?
R: l clean home.
I: When you think of your caretakers or Ezidis, does it harm you or is it good for you?
R: When l’m thinking of my family it harms me but l always want to know about them.
I: When all Ezidis support each other are you happy?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: A lot.
I: Do you believe in your strength?
R: Yes.
I: Do you pray?
R: Yes.
I: Staying alone or being with people is good for you?
Do you want to stay away from the things that reminds you ISIS?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: 4.
I: When you talk on your situation, is it good or bad for you?
R: On the day which l talk, l have headache.
I: Do you think that seeing a psychiatrist will be good for you?
R: Yes.
I: How much?
R: 3.
I: When you feel sick, do you want Ezidis to help you?
R: Yes, they help you.
I: How much.
R: 3 because there aren’t too many Ezidis here.
I: When you think too much, is there anything else to make yourself relieve?
R: l log out my social media accounts like facebook.
I: Shall we give a break? Ok.
Have you ever got mental drugs?
R: No.
I: Since you came here, have you ever seen a psychiatrist?
R: He comes here, he is Kurdish one.
I: Is it only you or are there any other people?
R: Everybody that sitting around here come but each of us talks to him one by one.
I: How good is it for you?
R: Sometimes good, sometimes not. Because sometimes l feel bad.
I: In what degree is it beneficial?
R: 2.
I: When you went to Lalesh or to see the Shekh, was it good or bad for you?
R: 4.
I: Do you take herbal drugs?
R: No.
I: What about the doctors in Germany?
R: They are very good.
I: And your social responsible?
In what respect was the psychiatrist good for you? You said 2.
R: He shows me some ways to forget myself.
I: Could you show us something?
R: …the finger..1:40:06
I: Do you ever say that ‘If l had such a help from the government or somewhere else, l would be better’?
R: For example, l really want my mum to come here. Because she needs help, she needs to be treated but it is not possible in Iraq.
I: We’ll ask you some questions and you’ll answer if these questions from now to 7 days ago has ever happened to you or not?
When you think about your situation and the incidents that you’ve gone through, do you think that your life is still like before, l mean when you were in their hands or you just think about them, you ..? (She doesn’t finish her sentence)
R: For 2 days l had headache.
I: And your heart?
R: Most of the time l have shortness of breath.
I: So you’re saying it is still like before? Do you undferstand what l mean? When you were captured, your life ..? (She doesn’t finish her sentence)
R: l realize that l … so much 1:43:10
I: Do you have difficulty in sleeping?
R: In the nights sometimes l don’t sleep till 3-4 am, and then l can’t wake up. And sometimes l dream that l’m in ISIS’ hands but when l wake up l realize that l’m in my bed.
I: These 7 days that passed, when you sleep you don’t wake up? I mean when you fall asleep, then you sleep well?
R: Yes.
I: 1 or 2?
R: 2.
I: Is there anything that reminds you ISIS?
R: That day we went to Brief(?) There was a guy with beard and moustache, l felt like l was in ISIS’ hands. I thought there is ISIS here as well.
I: Do you always feel like that?
R: Yes.
I: On these days, do you get angry easily?
R: I get angry easily.
I: 4?
R: 4.
I: When you remember those incidents, do you try to forget them?
R: I can’t talk, if l talk l get angry.
I: But you can’t stop your getting angry?
R: No l can’t.
I: When you get angry, when you remember those incidents, don’t you want to remember them or it is because you can not stop getting angry?
R: l can’t help it.
I: So you don’t want to think about them but they still come to your mind?
R: I don’t want to think about them but they come to my mind.
I: To what extent you don’t want to think about them?
R: 4.
I: Do you ever feel that all the things you lived is just a dream?
R: Yes.
I: Do you want to stay away from those things?
R: Yes.
I: Do you feel that those incidents come as an image in front your eyes?
R: Yes.
I: Do you get angry easily?
R: Yes.
I: You don’t want to think about them?
R: No l don’t.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, your life gets worse so do you care about your life or you don’t mind it?
R: Yes l care.
I: When those incidents come to your mind, do you feel like a dead?
R: I feel like a person that is dead, broken all over and then arised.
I: Do you feel like so often?
R: .. (the interpretor says ‘Viel’ that means ‘very’)
I: After you fell into their hands, you know that your attitudes are not like before. Do you ever say something or behave like the time when you were in their hands?
R: No.
I: Do you sleep early?
R: No, l can’t sleep early in the nights.
I: To what extent?
Do you feel all the same or does it differ from day to day?
R: It differs from day to day.
I: To what degree?
Do you want to get rid of all those thoughts?
R: l don’t want the things l’ve undergone to be lost.
I: Do you have difficulty in concentration?
R: Not every time.
I: When you think about those events, do you have shortness of breath or do you sweat?
R: Yes.
I: Very much?
R: Yes.
I: Do you dream?
R: Yes, sometimes l dream that l’m captured. For example this morning l had such a dream.
I: Are you conscious more now? Are you aware of the environment more? Do you afraid if you go ..?
R: I’m not afraid but when l go to Frankfurt, l am afraid of big cities so much.
I: Last week?
R: This mornig we went to …1:53:15
I: Do you try not to speak on these problems?
R: Sometimes yes, sometimes no.
I: 2 or 3?
R: 2.
I: We have 3 more questions and then it is finished.
What are the 3 good points of Germany that you’ve experienced?
R: All of the things of Germany is good for me.
I: Say something.
R: To me, the most important one is being in secure. There is nothing that can be done forcibly.
I: Do you think that it is good or bad that you came here?
R: Very good.
I: So 3 good points of your coming here? You came here by plane, there are translators here, psychiatrist?
R: Yes the psychiatrist …1:55:24 it is so important for us. Germany allowed lots of women to come here, the women that lost their husband and have little babies. That’s pretty good.
I: And 3 negative points?
R: l can not say.
I: You can’t? Why?
R: Because my family and my son can’t come here. Their German passports are’nt sent and they can’t come to Iraq.
I: Anything else?
R: No.
I: What do you hope for the future?
R: All my family stay together and live in secure.
I: Ok, thank you so much.