FILE:116
I: Do you ever think about forgiving ISIS?
R: No, never.
I: If they say ‘We want you to forgive us’?
R: l can not.
I: How important is it for you to know what happened? From 0 to 4.
R: What do you mean? Where?
I: In Iraq. Do you want to know what’s happening there, is that important for you?
R: No, l don’t want to know.
I: How important is it for you to let people and your grandchildren know what ISIS have done to you?
R: 4.
I: Why do you want people to know about you?
R: We’ll never forget what they have done to us. We want everybody to know what kind of people these are.
I: What can be done to let your grand-grandchildren know about you?
R: If somebody tries to let our voice be heard.
I: Have you ever heard about a truth commission?
R: No.
I: That’s a kind of commission that is formed by the government and then for example this commission goes and searchs what ISIS has done, it records whatever ISIS has done. Then the research is presented to the government to be used by the courts. Do you think the such a commission will work?
R: No.
I: Why do you think so?
R: Because we’ve seen lots of commissions there but none of them has done anything.
I: In general what should be done for the victims of ISIS, for the people like you?
R: We’ve been hurt too much. For example the ones in Iraq can be brought to here. I came here and now l’m in secure. I want the victims to be safe.
I: And what can be done for Ezidis?
R: I want all Ezidis to come here to feel safe. So long as they live there, nobody does anything for them; Neither the Iraqi government nor the others.
I: Do you think that others consider you as a victim?
R: Not all of them, just some of them.
I: Why?
R: Because we don’t have such a large population. We know who’s a victim and who is not. 
I: Do you think that one day there will be peace in Iraq?
R: No, l don’t believe that; till this Iraqi government stays in office, l don’t believe that there will be peace in Iraq.
I: You know that there is a struggle against ISIS. Do you think this struggle will manage to get rid of ISIS?
R: l don’t know.
I: Don’t you believe in that?
R: No, l don’t believe it.
I: What can be done to save Ezidis in Iraq?
R: Till they stay in Iraq, they won’t ever be in safety so they should be taken out of Iraq.
I: So, if you don’t want to answer any questions, don’t hesitate.
R: Ok.
I: Since you arrived here in Germany, how often do you talk to people about your situation?
R: No, l don’t want to talk to anybody.
I: You said that l have never talked to aybody what l’ve been through. But haven’t you ever talked to your friends or your family?
R: It is just with my family.
I: Have you seen the psychiatrist?
R: Just for a few times, I didn’t talk about what l’ve been through.
I: Have you ever written about yourself?
R: No.
I: Do you follow the news or do you want to know what’s going on there?
R: No, l don’t want to.
I: Do you sometimes call anybody to get informaton on them?
R: Yes.
I: By whatsapp or on facebook?
R: Yes.
I: We’ll ask you some questions about your experiences, like how you were captured, how long did you stay in their hands. But if you feel disturbed, you can stop the interview. Shall we start?
R: Yes.
I: Which village are you from? Qine?
So were you captured in Tel Qeseb?
R: We used to live in Tel Qeseb but we passed to Qine and were captured there.
I: And then?
R: We were captured there and then we were taken to a house in Tel Afer.
I: How long did you stay in Tel Afer?
R: I didn’t pass to anywhere else, l stayed in Tel Afer. We were taken to the prison Baduş in Tel Afer.
I: The prison Baduş? Where is it?
R: Just next to Mosul.
I: Were you with your family?
R: Yes l was.
I: Şikriya too?
R: No, she was taken from us in Tel Afer.
I: Then we were brought back to a school in Tel Afer. I pretended to be sick to stay with my family.
I: So were you with your family?
R: All my sisters were separated from us but l wanted to stay with my mum, l didn’t want to be separated from my mum, you know you feel strong. For about a month we stayed in that school and then we were taken to a house in a village. Once in 2-3 days they(ISIS) were coming to take some women and girls. One day they told us as well. I was with one of my sisters, my brother’s and uncle’s wives, we were all together with lots of Ezidis. They told us they would take us to Syria. That night we were brought back to the house and we planned to escape; we would escape or be killed.
I: So did you escape?
R: Yes, we did. We escaped to Kurdistan.
I: How long were you captured?
R: About 3 months.
I: With whom did you escape?
R: l, my brother’s wife and all my three sisters and some others escaped.
I: Did your mum stay there?
R: Yes. At night we kept walking and in the day we hid ourselves. Because it was still their area. Then Ezidis came to take us.
I: Do you want to tell something else?
R: No.
I: This capture, has it affected your health?
R: Yes, l’ve been seized with fear.
I: How severe has it affected your health, too much?
R: My health is fine but this fear has affected my psychology.
I: Though you told us that you have no problem with your health, we’ll ask you questions about your health.
R: Ok.
I: Do you have any pain?
R: No.
I: Do you have an itch?
R: No.
I: Do you have any problems with your movement or in walking?
R: No.
I: Do you lose control and fall?
R: No.
I: Your eyes, nose and ears?
R: No problem with them.
I: Do you have any problem with breathing?
R: Sometimes.
I: How often?
R: 3.
I: Any dizziness?
R: No.
I: Any pain in your heart?
R: No.
I: Do you have problems in the stomach?
R: No.
I: Is there anything else that you want to say?
You said that you sometimes have shortness of breath, do you think that it is because of the things that you’ve experienced?
R: Yes, l told you that l’ve been seized with fear. When l remember those days l feel like that.
I: Now we’ll say to you some reasons from 0 to 4, like ‘l have shortness of breath because of such a reason and etc.’ If it is because of such a reason, then you’ll say the degree. So we’ll talk about your shortness of breath because you said that you only have this problem. Do you think that it is because of your mental health?
R: Yes.
I: To what extent?
R: 3.
I: Do you think that it is god’s will?
R: l think it’s god’s will for what l’ve been through.
I: Have the incidents you’ve experienced affected the relation between you and other people?
R: l don’t like to get in big groups, l can’t bear it.
I: Have they affected your daily life?
R: Not all the time.
I: Do you ever feel like getting out of the Ezidi community?
R: No.
I: Does this experience affect your faith?
R: It got stronger.
I: What do you do to feel better, to forget?
R: l listen to music.
I: And what do you do for your shortness of breath? Do you take any medications?
R: No.
I: We’ll give some ways and you’ll answer if they make you feel stronger.
Do you believe in your strength? Do you think that you are strong?
R: 4.
I: Do you personally believe in your strength?
R: 4.
I: Do you pray?
R: 3.
I: Do you want to stay alone?
R: 4.
I: Do you want to erase those incidents from your mind?
R: 4.
I: Do you want to share your experiences with anybody?
R: No.
I: Do you think that going to see the psychiatrist helps you?
R: Just for a few times l’ve been to see. It is 3.
I: Do you feel you need any help from Ezidis or do you just need your family?
R: Just my family. (Here the interpretor can’t make the respondent understand so l don’t think that the respondent understands the question at all.)
I: Do you do anything else to forget yourself?
R: Just music.
I: So we’ll tell you some health care aids and can you tell us if you already have these aids and how much have they helped you?
Have you ever taken mental drugs?
R: No.
I: Have you gone to see the psychiatrist?
R: 2-3 times.
I: Were you alone?
R: Yes, l was alone, it wasn’t within a group.
I: Have you seen the Shekh or some religious person after the capturing?
R: No.
I: Do you take herbal drugs?
R: No.
I: The woman who comes with you to the Social, does that woman help you?
R: Yes, she is very good.
I: The house doctor, is she/he good for you?
R: Yes. It is 4.
I: Do you want to go to see the psychiatrist again?
R: If l feel like going, l wiil.
I: To what extent is she good for you, the woman that is working in Social?
R: 4.
I: In what respect does the therapy help you?
R: l feel relieved.
I: Do you need somebody else for these?
R: No.
I: Do you remember those incidents when you just have a seat?
R: Sometimes, 3.
I: Do you have problem in sleeping?
R: No.
I: Does any object remind you of those incidents?
R: Sometimes, 2.
I: Do you get angry.
R: From time to time, 2.
I: Do you try to avoid getting angry?
R: Yes, 3.
I: Do you ever feel like that all you’ve lived is just a dream?
R: Yes sometimes l feel like that. 2.
I: Do you want to stay away from these incidents?
R: Yes, 4.
I: Do you feel that those incidents come as an image in front of your eyes?
R: 2.
I: Do you get winced?
R: Sometimes, 2.
I: Do you try to avoid those thoughts in your mind?
R: Yes, 4. I have to be happy.
I: Do you feel numb? (She is trying to explain it)
R: Sometimes, 2.
I: When you think about these incidents, do you feel like you are there?
R: No.
I: Do you get any problems before sleep? I mean not in sleeping but before sleeping.
R: No.
I: …47:25 do you feel like that?
R: No.
I: Do you try to get rid of these thoughts?
R: Yes, 2.
I: Do you have problem in concentration.
R: Yes, it is too bad. 4.
I: Do you have any reaction when you remember what you lived?
R: No, l have problem just in concentration.
I: Do you have nightmares?
R: No.
I: Are you always afraid or not?
R: No, not too much.
I: You said that l don’t want to talk. To what extent?
R: Whenever l talk to somebody about these events, it makes me feel like l’m in that time.
I: Thank you so much for answering the questions. We have a few more questions and then it’s over.
Since you’ve arrived here in Germany, how is your experience about it? It’s been 2 years that you are here, right? So what are the good points of your experiences about here?
R: It is good that l came here. I went to school, learning another language. I’ve see no fighting here.
I: You know you were brought here by a …50:39? How happy are you with it?
R: l’m very happy with it.
I: Why?
R: They brought us here, provided evertyhing we need.
I: Do you want to say something else? So is there anything that you’re not satisfied with?
R: No, there is nothing.
I: What is your hope for your life? Where do you get your strength?
R: l get it from my family.
I: Thank you, our questions are finished. If you have any questions for us, l can translate them.
R: No, thank you.