RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
“I” How old are you?
“R” ?
The respondent replied in Deutsch, so i couldn’t understand it. 
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
“I” Are you married? 
“R” Yes. 
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
“I” Where is your husband? 
“R” He is in United States.
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
“I” How many people live with you now? 
“R” I live with my sister and brother here. 
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
“I” How many people of your family living with you now?
“R” 6 people, my sister and her 2 kids, my brother and his son, and me. 
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
“I” All are the kids boys? or there are girls too?
“R” They are all boys. 
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
“I” Can you read or write in any language? 
“R” Yes, i can read and write in Deutsch, Arabic and Kurdish.
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
“I” Did you go to school in Iraq? 
“R” Yes, i went to school for 12 years. 
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
“I” Are you currently in school? 
“R” Yes, i do language courses. 
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
“I” Are you currently employed? 
“R” No. 
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
“I” Why aren’t you seeking employment? 
“R” I want to finish language level B1, then i will travel to join my husband in America, he is doing my paperwork, after finishing it he will send me a visa to go there.  
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
“I” Before ISIS were you working outside of your home or no? 
“R” No, i was also going to school.
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
“I” What is your religion?  
“R” It’s Yazidi. 
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
“I” What people are you from? Arabs, Kurds..?
“R” I’m Yazidi. 
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
“I” What are your immediate worries or priorities or wishes for the future? 
“I” All I worry about is our captives at ISIS, if they get free, then we won’t have anything to worry about. 
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
“I” What do you need to rebuild your life? like to feel your life is Ok again? 
“R” Only be freedom of our captives, my life would be better. 
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
“I” Now we will ask you some questions, and you’d tell us how much strong or weak is your answer according to these signs?
 “R” Ok. 
“I” How much control do you have over your life? like you can do whatever and whenever you want?
“R” I should answer according to this sign? i think like this. (she pointing to a sign before her).   
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
“I” What do you think the future holds for you? 
“R” My future? I only want my brother and our children to come back to us, that’s our future. 
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
“I” Suppose the Iraqi situation improved, would you go back and live there, or live in Kurdistan, or stay here or maybe travel to America? 
“R” If the life was safe in Iraq, of course i would go back and live n Sinjar.   
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
“I” Why Sinjar? 
“R” Because it’s the best place. 
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
“I” Do you feel like Germany is your homeland? 
“R” No, i don’t feel so. 
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
“I” Overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last 2 years? 
“R” It’s not very good.   
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
“I” Why? 
“R” Life is very good here, people are respectable, everything is ok but the problem is that we don’t feel stable or at rest. I came to Germany with my little nephew, i didn’t want to come but i had to accompany him, because he isn’t ok, he was captive too he has mental problems, his mother is still captured by ISIS, and my parents are old, so i came with him.   
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
“I” What are the main changes should be done to make you feel protected in Iraq or Kurdistan? to stop a war or to have a fortified place for only Yazidi or what?  
“R” Safety should be existed, good living and safe place. 
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
“I” What does justice mean to you? 
“R” I couldn’t understand? 
“I” What are your rights? 
“R” We have no rights in Iraq, it has been 3 years and Yazidi are obscured have no one to defend them while women, men and kids are being killed and tortured, they have no rights at all. 
“I” And what are their rights? 
“R” For those who were damaged and hurt by ISIS they must get their rights back, ISIS criminals should held accountable for all their crimes. 
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How much of priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you? 
“R” Very important. 
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
“I” How optimistic are you that you will get justice? 
“R” Sometimes i think nothing wrong will ever happen to ISIS, comparing to the violations they did to us, one day changed everything upside down all our people were gone no man was left of us.  
“I” But do you believe that you will get justice? 
“R” No one i don’t think so. My village had about 1750 habitants, ISIS took all the women and kids for themselves and killed about 700 men and young men, ISIS took the kids and girls away from their mothers, then they were targeted by air raids, therefore i believe that nothing will be ok as it was before.  
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” How important is it for you that the persons who committed the violence against civilians are held accountable for their actions? 
“R” It’s very important, because Yazidi were innocents did nothing wrong to deserve that suffer, ISIS has no reason to attack us, we know all the criminals who killed our men, they were Arabs from my village and other village around us, our men invited them to our banquets during the feasts and occasions, and they hid their grudge against us since that time.  
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” Who should be held accountable of ISIS, princes or normal fighters, or all? 
“R” All of them. 
“I” And all Arabs? 
“R” No, not all the Arabs.  
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
“I” And how should they held accountable for their actions, to be executed by hanging or to be torn into pieces? 
“R” Their sentence is one, only God can punish them. Comparing to our torture none of the penalties will satisfy me. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Have you heard about any attempts to bring those criminals to justice? 
“R” No, i haven’t.  
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Can you forgive those criminals or no? 
“R” No, never. 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
“I” What should be done to make you forgive them? 
“R” Whatever will be done, won’t make me forgive them at all. 
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How important is it for you to know any news about ISIS, what’s happening there if they’re being killed or they’re controlling more areas?  
“R” Yes, it’s very important to know their news.  
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
“I” How much is important to you to let the rest of the world know about your crisis? 
“R” Yes, it’s important too, i do want all the world know about it.
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
“I” How important is it for you to let the Yazidi future generations know about it? 
“R” It’s very important too. 
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
“I” Can you explain your previous answers? 
“R” I want all the people and our grandchildren know about it, because it’s not a normal thing to ignored (as much as we suffered). It would be remembered till the end of the world.  
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
“I” What should be done to ensure that enlightening would happen? like by writing a book and what? 
“R” To let the major states know about, and that date would be a special day and writing everything down. 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
“I” Have you heard of truth commission? 
“R” Yes. 
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
“I” Truth commissions is a group of people who do some investigations at specific place with some of the victims to make sure of what ISIS did and send all their works to the government so it can find the criminals and bring them to justice, Do you think they should do the same with ISIS? 
“R” Yes, of course.   
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
“I” What should do be done to all the victims of ISIS ? like you were captive and freed afterwards?
“I” I wasn’t captive, but in general ISIS victims should be free, then to get a safe place to live in like Germany or any other peaceful country, so they would be able to forget all the suffer. 
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
“I” And what should be done to Yazidi victims in particular? 
“R” To get justice. 
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
“i” Do you recognize yourself as an ISIS captive or now, were you really captured by ISIS in fact? 
“R” No,i wasn’t, but for us Yazidi we all are same, i wasn’t captive, but my family was.
“I” So what do think, how the community look at them, do the people accept you or no? 
“R” It’s something happened to all of us, no one deny it,even for some who weren’t really captive, they have families were and still captives by ISIS. 
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
“I” In your opinion, is it possible Iraq situation will improve, and it’s war will be over one day? 
“R” It’s something great powers know about.
“I” But you, what do you think,? will it happen or no? 
“R”It’s very difficult to have a sting peace.  
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
“I” What about Arabs countries, will they be peaceful again? 
“R” It’s difficult too, they always in conflicts. 
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
“I” What should be done to build a lasting peace in Iraq? 
“R” All the  parties should be united and defend each other, no sectarianism be there so no such new attacks would start again. 
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
“I” What do you think about the fighters attacking ISIS? can they liberate Iraq of ISIS invasion or no? 
“R” I think it’s difficult to kick them out. 
An interruption happened by a little boy. 
“R” This little boy can’t speak yet, i came with him here. 
“I” Where is his mother? 
“R” Since 3 months she has been freed, but she couldn’t come yet, his father is here, he illegally arrived here.   
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
“I” In your opinion, what should be done to protect Yazidi living in Iraq? 
“R” An international protection should exist in Iraq. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
“I” Since you arrived Germany, how often have you  discussed your story with others? if you did?
“R” I have discussed it with my social assistants , friends and family, it’s our everyday subject.   
“I” With the police or doctors? 
“R” No, i haven’t. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
“I” Have you written your story down? 
“R” No, but it’s saved by heart in my mind.
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
“I” How often do you seek information about what’s happening in Iraq? 
“R” All the time, everyday it’s our main subject.    
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
“I” Why do you seek information? 
“R” To know what’s happening with our people living in camps in bad conditions, and to be informed if anyone released or escaped from ISIS.
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
“I” Where do you seek information, on facebook, calls....?
“R” From family and Twitter, i don’t have facebook.   
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
“I” How do you communicate your Yazidi friends, on Whatsapp,newspaper Twitter…?
“R” Only by Whatsapp. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
“I” You weren’t captive by ISIS? but would you like to tell us some few things about that? 
“R” No, i wasn’t captive, but i will tell you how i could get out of there. In 03/08 i was at my uncle’s house, it’s in a village located closer to sijar and the mountains than my village, we heard that ISIS is threatening and coming closer so we ran away to the mountains with the other villagers and men who had no crafts or jobs by a lot of cars to the mountains, i was engaged to my cousin the same i married to now, when we arrived to a cave we hid inside it so ISIS couldn’t see us we had no water nor food, my father with rest of my family and my brother with his family could get out of Kojo (a besieged village) and arrived to my uncles home in Sinjar. We stayed one night in that cave, Early next morning at 4am we left there and headed to a rugged place far from Sinjar called (Kersa) so that ISIS won’t find us, we stayed there for 7 days had no food only with little of water, then we heard that ISIS would arrived there too, so we got off again walked from 7am to 12 midnight till we arrived to Syrian borders, when we knew that we were in safe we lied down and had some rest, then big cars came we got on them and headed to Derek camp in Syria, from Syria we travelled to Kurdistan. My father, mother and brother were in Sinjar besieged by ISIS in Kojo village from 03/08 to 15/08 stuck there no one helped them, then with more than 40 big cars ISIS came and took them all to 2 floors school of Kojo, ISIS brought some food it was lunch time, but before anyone could eat, ISIS ordered them all to gather at the school square with the mayor, they ordered him to convert their religion into Muslims, he refused and told them that our religion and they will never be Muslims, then ISIS told him that even they didn’t change their religion, they don’t have to worry, ISIS won’t hurt them, they would only drive them to Sinjar mountains. Men were on the upper floor, women, girls and kids were lower floor and ISIS took all the money, gold and cars, even their documents, identity card and passports. Women didn’t know what was happening down there, ISIS divided our men into more than 7 groups each group was composed of more than 30 men and 13 years old boys they crammed them all into cars and took them to the fields of our village where they persecuted them all, neither our men knew what was happening they were happy because they thought that they were going to Sinjar mountains as ISIS told them. There were water basins for watering crops, ISIS took our men and shooted them there, out of 800 men of my village only 19 could survive. ISIS kept killing our men group after group without even making sure if they were really get killed, some of our men were wounded but they didn’t die, so they sneak out drawing themselves out of Kojo to escape, but ISIS (Arabs) from Baaj village (near of Kojo) called them and got angry with them by saying why ISIS of Kojo were throwing their injured on ISIS of Baaj, so our men were killed on the way. The lower floor was empty of men, ISIS left no one there, they killed them all, and the old women aged from (70-50 some of them 30 years old) ISIS said that those women weren’t good for marriage so they took them to Soulakh institute and killed them all about 83 woman. Then they took the children and the young girls and married them all. After marrying 9 -10 years old girls they sold them to each other. My brother with his wife, 3 sons and a daughter could get out of Kojo and arrived to Sinjar when we arrived to Sinjar mountains. Then they started walking, my brother is sick has a unique kidney he was very tired to walk, his family continued walking and survived but he became very ill so he walked slowly then ISIS saw him and took him from 03/08 to now we know nothing about him, neither we know what happened with my other brother (i have 2 brothers, they are the eldest ones) he was in the village too ISIS took him with the other men, they took his wife and 2 boys away too. I have many cousins who were stuck in the village too, but my father, my mother, my brother and his wife with their 2 boys (this one and the youngest one he was one 1 year) they had left the village only in one night before ISIS arrival and had joined my uncle but on the way while they were running away ISIS came in their way and killed half of them, they killed my uncle, his wife, his daughter in law with her 2 sons and my little nephew (1 years old brother of this one), and imprisoned the other half of this group including my parents, they stayed in their captivity for 8 months, afterwards they released the elderly people, but we know nothing about my parents yet, not only them but about a lot of other families, a lot of girls and children got killed while ISIS was being shelled by air raids.  
“I” Thanks for your saings we know that was very tough time for you and your family. 
“R” Yes, it is indeed. 
“I” Can you answer more of our questions now or no? 
“R” Yes, i can.  
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
“I” You haven’t been captured but you witnessed so much suffer, do you think that violent experience had affected your health, or no, you are like before? 
“R” No, none of us is still well as before, i’ve been affected too.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
“I” In what way that experience affected you? your psycholog or your body?  
“R” Overthinking, before we were living normally having no worries,having each others, having everything we needed, but now after ISIS came, they took everything away from us our families our peace of mind, we have nothing to talk about except ISIS, those kids remember nothing except ISIS, now each one of us is living alone in a country, it’s very difficult to live like this.      
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
“I” How much that experience has affected you? 
“R” A lot. (pointing to a picture in front of her). 
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
“I” After ISIS, do you feel any pain in your body, your back or ….?
“R” No, i just feel at unrest and my head is always confused. 
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
“I” Do you feel sometimes of itching, numbness or burning in your skin? 
“R” No, i don’t feel so. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
“I” Do you feel like you can’t walk ? 
“R” No, i walk well only my mind is not ok at all. 
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
“I”Do you faint sometimes? 
“R” No. 
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
“I” Do you feel like you have troubles in your sight or smelling or hearing? 
“R” No, i don’t. 
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
“I”Do you feel of suffocation like you can’t breathe? 
“R” Not alot like this, about 50%. 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
“I” Do you have dizziness? 
“R” Yes, but not alot.  
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
“I” Do you have heart troubles? 
“R” No, it’s good. 
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
“i” do you have gastrointestinal disorders? 
“R” No.  
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
“I” Do you have any other illnesses ? 
“R” No. 
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
“I” How do you explain these effects of ISIS experience on your health? 
“R” I have too much thoughts in my mind, it’s always there now, but there weren’t before. 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
“I” How does that experience affected your health? like you can’t talk normally with the people or what? 
“R” I don’t have the will to talk with other people, like when i go to school, nor i can concentrate at all, there are many people from different countries there . 
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
“I” Do you think that’s unrest is because of psychological problems or of what? 
“R” It’s all because of all the bad things i’ve been through, not of other causes. 
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
“I” Do you think your problem is because you are physical sick? 
“R” No, i’m not sick, but because that evil things had really happened with me. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
“I” Sometimes we can’t understand why bad things had happened, what do you think are the reasons behind them? 
“R” We believe that everything is happening following to God orders, but i couldn’t understand what are the reasons behind these misery we lived in, i still can’t find it.  
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
“I” How does that experience change you, like you are now impatient or easily get nervous, or you don’t like to talk to people? 
“R” Yes, I’m impatient now. 
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
“I” Does that experience affected your relation with Yazidi friends ? You feel like you don’t like to talk to them , you get away from them, or you’re still like before? 
“R” Yes, i’m still like before, i relieve when i see them, i like to talk to them.  
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
“I” Don’t you think that Yazidi community has changed with you like you are excluded from them? 
“R” No, on the contrary, they still love le and respect me too. 
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
“I” You know that everything ISIS did i to you was because of your religion? has that experience affected your faith in your religion or no, it’s stronger than before? 
“R” Yes, it was because my religion, but it hasn’t affected my religion at all, my faith in my  is stronger than before. 
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
“I” After all ISIS violations against you, how do you cope with your pains and depress? 
“R” It’s very hard to manage it. 
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
“I” Do you follow any specific strategy to make it easier on you? you know sometimes a person feels like dead after passing harsh times? 
“R” Because i know how much i suffered or stopped at a point the life will still go on, i encourage myself by thinking of this. 
“I” Do you have any special activity to do when you feel upset? 
“R” I talk with my friends, it helps well to feel better. 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
“I” Do you believe that being with your family and friends makes you stronger? 
“R”  Yes. 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
“I” Do you believe in your personal powers? like you can pass the hardship on your own?  
“R” On my own?! It’s very difficult on me to do it, but i’m obliged to. 
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
“I” Do you usually pray?
“R” Yes, a lot.  
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
“I” Do you prefer being with the people or on your own? 
“R” I prefer to be with people. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
“I” Do you try to avoid seeing things remind you of ISIS and of that hard times? 
“R” No, on the contrary, i try not to forget it, it’s not a normal thing to be forgettable. 
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
“I” Does it help you if you discuss it with other people? 
“R” Yes, it does. 
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
“I” Do you believe that psychologists might help you in passing your difficulties or no? 
“R” Actually i don’t see psychologists. 
“I” Do you think they can help or no? 
 “R” No, i don’t think they can help me. 
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
“I” Does Yazidi community offers you help if you needed? like if you were sick do you call anyone of your Yazidi friends to come, and do they come to help you? 
“R” Yes, they come to help. 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
“I” Do you have any specific strategy helps you to get better? like when you overthink and feel upset, what do you do to get out of that that condition? 
“R” I don’t know.  
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
“I” Do you take any psychological medication? 
“R” No, i don’t. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
“I” Did you visit Lalash, does it help you being there? 
“R” Ye, i did, it helps me feel at ease and relaxed.  
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
“I” You know there herbal natural medications which you can buy from pharmacies (mint or green tea)? do you take any, and they help you? 
“R” No, i don’t. 
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
“I” Do your social assistants help you or no? 
“R” Yes, they do, they are very good and helpful.
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
“I” Do you see doctors here? 
“R” Yes, sometimes i feel unwell, i go to see them. 
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” How much doctors help you? 
“R” Very much, they are very helpful. 
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” You mentioned that visiting Lalash helped you feel better? how much did it help? 
“R” Yes, when i be there, my faith become stronger that gives me strength to go on, and feel much more confident and relieved. And the assistants here help me very much too, they do help with everything i need. 
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
“I” Do you still need any professional help that might improve your well-being, but no one can offer it to you? 
“R” No, i don’t.
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
“I” I will mention you list of illnesses, and you’ll tell me how much strong do you suffer of each one of them during the last 7 days? 
“R” Ok. 
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
“I” Any reminder makes you feel like you go back to that time, then you become heartbroken, and how much do you feel it?
“R” Yes, i feel it, very strong.  
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
“I” Do you have troubles staying up late at nights? 
“R” Yes, i have it a lot of time. 
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
“I” Do you find normal things around you remind you of ISIS, like a shadow from a window? 
“R” Yes, i feel it a lot.  
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
“I” Do you feel easily irritable and suffocated? 
“R” Not very much.  
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
“I” I avoided letting myself get upset when i thought about it? 
“R” No, i’m always upset about it.  
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
“I” Do you purposely think about it, so you won’t forget it, or you can’t stop thinking of it? 
“R” No, i don’t want to think about all  the time, but i can’t. 
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
“I” You feel like everything was like a dream? 
“R” Yes, i feel it like a dream. 
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
“I” Do you stay away from reminder or you don’t want to forget it? You know there are some people who do try not to forget what happened with them? 
“R” Yes, actually, i’m one of those people who don’t want to forget. 
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
“I” Pictures popped into your mind? 
“R” Yes, i have them in my mind every now and then.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
“I” Do you easily get angry or jumpy? 
“I” Yes, i easily get terrified. 
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
“I” Do you sit alone and to recollect everything happened to you, or no, you don’t try? 
“R” Ye, a lot of times i try to remember it, and sometimes i don’t. 
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
“I” Are you aware of your brokenhearted, and you’re not trying to fix it? 
“R”  Yes, i’m lie that. 
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
“I” Do you feel like you are senseless?
“R” Yes, i do feel it.  
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
“I” Do you have feelings bring you back to that time? you feel like that your manners has been changed? 
“R” No, i’m much the same, like before.  
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
“I” Do you have sleeping troubles? 
“R” Yes, i have. 
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
“I” Do you have waves of strong feelings, sometimes you feel unwell, sometimes you are ok? 
“R” Yes, i have it. 
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
“I” Do you want to remove it from your memory? 
“R” Yes, i want. 
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
“I”Do you have concentration troubles? 
“R” Yes. 
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
“I” When you think of that experience does your body sweat or of  feel of tingling? 
“R” Yes, i do.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
“I” Do you have dreams about it?
“R” Oh yes, i have a lot of dreams. 
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
“I” After your trauma, do you feel like everyday you need to  sure everything is ok, because you are always cautious? 
“R” No, i don’t feel that.  
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
“I” Do you try not to talk about it? 
“R” Yes, ?
The respondent’s voice was very low after saying Yes, i couldn’t understand her answer.
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
“I” We still have only 3 more questions, then it will be over. 
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
“I” What are the good things that Germany offered you? 
“R” Honestly, Germany is very good with us, it give us the things that Iraq didn’t give, it offered us a safe and a proper life. 
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” What are the best 3 things that this project offered you, or you can say that you’ve found in Germany? 
“R” The sum of money that we get every month, safety and the respectable life. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” What are the worst 3 things you’ve found here? 
“R” The weather, the boredom and the school. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
“I” What is your hope for the future? 
“R” I don’t have. 
“I” You know each person has hope for the future, what do wish to happen in your future? 
“R” To rejoin my husband. 
“I” Ok, thanks alot for your patience and your answers , do you still have anything at all to tell us?
“R” No, thank you too, it’s good to speak out and let go of the bad things inside, it helps me to feel comfortable a little bit. 
“I” Thanks, it’s very important for us to help you feeling better.