RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
“I” You are 44 years old? 
“R” Yes. 
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
“I” Are you married? 
“R” Yes.
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
“I” Where is your husband? 
“R” He is still captive by ISIS. 
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
“I” How many people are living with now? 
“R” My family was 10 people, now i have 3 kids with me. 
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
“I” Can you read or write in any language? 
“R” No. 
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
“I” Did you go to school in Iraq? 
“R” Yes, only to fourth or fifth grade. 
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
“I” Are you currently in school? 
“R” No, i tried but they said there is no space for me yet, i speak Deutsch very little bit only to manage in shopping. 
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
“I” Do you want to attend school in the future?
“R” Yes, of course, the language would help so much in managing my life or when i go somewhere. 
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
“I” Are you currently employed?
“R” No, i can’t, i have so much pain in all my body.  
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
“I” Are you looking for a job? 
“R” No, i won’t be able to work, i can’t.
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
“I” Before ISIS, were you employed? 
“R” No, only household work, i was a housewife. 
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
“I” What is your religious faith? 
“R” Yazidi. 
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
“I” What people do you belong to? 
“R” Yazidi. 
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
“I” What are you immediate concerns and priorities in your life?
“R” Only the captives, i have 2 sons,my daughter, my 50 years old husband, my 10 years old son, my 17 years old son, they all were blindfolded and handcuffed before my eyes, it has 3 years and i know nothing about them, i wish i know anything about them, i’m suffering so much for them.  
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
“I” What do you need the most to rebuild your life? 
“R” Only my kids and husband come back to me, 3 years and i know nothing, i don’t know if they’re still alive or dead, when we were there my 10 years old son who is still captive, he saw 3 headers cut in an ISIS point yard and called me to see them.  
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
“I” How much do you have control over your life? 
“R” Yes i have full control, but after ISIS i lost my life. 
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
“I” What do you think the future holds for you? 
“R” We don’t have any future, i only have 2 little sons now, they took my brother, my 12 years old daughter, my 10 years old son, my 17 years old son, my husband all, if i was dead better than to alive such a life.  
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
“I” Suppose the situation improved in Iraq, would you go and live there, or stay in Germany or go to another country? 
“R” Even the situation improved, how could i live there without having my kids and my family around me. of course i won’t go back and live in Iraq, so i’ll stay here.  
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
“I” Why will you stay here? 
“R” Because the German state is supporting our children with sum of money monthly, in Iraq, i have sister in laws who escaped from ISIS since short time ago, she had to stay with her kids in camps, but the the responsible of the camps there, didn’t offered them food, to make them get out of there, we have no place there anymore. 
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
“I” Do you fell Germany like your homeland? 
“R” Yes, it’s very good to us. 
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
“I” In general after your stay here, how would you judge your experience here?
“R” It’s very good.
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
“I” Can you explain why? 
“R” Because after my kids are being supported by the government financially, they need no one to cover their essential needs (since their father is lost) and they go to school, that all i worry about.  
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
“I” If you were to return to Iraq, what should be changed to make you feel safe there again? 
“R” To be safe and have a peaceful future there, all our captives to be released, to kick ISIS us out of Iraq, and Yazidi get an international protection.  
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what they had done to you? 
“R” I’ll get justice only if my children and husband will come back to me, It’s very important. 
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
“I” How optimistic you’ll get justice? 
“R” Yes, very much.
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” Who should held accountable of ISIS, their princes, leaders fighters? 
“R” All of them, i hope German would punish them with the same bad means that they torture us, you know now German is full of ISIS, all those who tortured us are living here. One times they came to take a 12 years old girl we defended her and tried to stop them, but they shooted all around us , kicked us and stepped on us and hit us until they took the girl. 
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
“I” How should they be hold accountable? 
“R” To be killed like they killed us, but before that, they should live through the horrible things like they did to us, Yazidi were blindfolded and handcuffed then shooted all around them, ISIS sit next to Yazidi bodies and bones and the wounded, they did all other inhuman violations, we of course want to get justice of them. 
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Are you aware that Iraqi courts are trying to bring ISIS to justice? 
“R” No, i didn’t hear about it. 
The respondent explains about another way of torture and persecuting a 10 years old boy by shackling him by wires, her voice isn’t clear, so i couldn’t understand.  
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Is it possible that you might forgive them? 
“R” No, that’s impossible. 
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How important is it to you to know what’s happening in Iraq with ISIS? 
“R” Yes, important. 
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
“I” How important is it to you to let the rest of the world to know about it? 
I have a headache now. 
“I” Do you want to take a break, let’s bring you some water. That’s why we’re doing this interview to show the people what ISIS has done to you. 
The respondent can’t continue speaking because she has very strong emotions toward her son and family. 
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
“I” What about your future generations, do you want to let them know? 
“R” Yes, of course i want them to know. 
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
“I” Can you tell me why you answered this way? 
“R” I want them to know so they’ll take all necessary safety precautions that won’t endanger them, not to live through the same hardships as we did.    
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
“I” What should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened ?like to write a book?
“R” Yes, to write a book so it’d saved in history, very important so everyone will know how bad they is ISIS and be cautious, ISIS shooted us and tortured my 10 years old son, till this moment i don’t know if he’s still alive or dead 
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
“I” Have you heard of a truth commission? 
“R” No.
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
“I” It’s a committee of experts who should be assigned by the Iraqi authorities to do researches and reports on ISIS violations with their victims to specify the dates, places and number of victims, then send the reports to the court to bring the criminals to justice. Do you think such a procedure must be taken against ISIS? 
“R” Yes. 
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
“I” In general, what should be done for victims of ISIS? 
“R” To bring our children and men back to us, they welcome us here we are very satisfied and grateful for them, all we need and care about is our captives, our children and men.  
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
“I” And what should be done specifically for Yazidi victims? 
“R” They need to get an international protection, to live in peace, to get a safe life without fears, without displacement. 
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
“I” Do the whole world recognize you as an ISIS victim?
“R” Not the whole world, maybe only Iraq recognize me, number 2 
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
“I” Do you think that the Iraq situation would improved one day even after long time? 
“R” No, it’s very difficult, i think it’ll never get its peace again. 
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
“I” Do you think the middle east will have a lasting peace? 
“R” No, it’s very difficult too to be peaceful.
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
“I” What should be done to build a lasting peace in Iraq? 
“R” An international protection should be based there, and the authorities should take their precautions and to be warned so it won’t happen again.  
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
“I” What do you think about the current military campaign against ISIS? 
“R” Yes, i heard that Peshmerga and Hashad Al-Shabi are fighting ISIS, but people still and always living in fears especially after Kurdistan referendum, Turkey and Iraq are threatening people in Kurdistan, so our people are preparing their bags to run away again. 
“I” You mean Turkey and Iraq will wage a war against the Kurds in Iraq? 
 “R” Yes, i know some people who live in camps near of their (Iran,and Turkey) borders, (they will be witnessing the shelling).  
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
“I” What should be done to protect Yazidi and other minorities in Iraq? 
“R” An international protection should exist there, so Yazidi won’t live through any new catastrophe. 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
“I” Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed it with the people here? 
“R” I discussed it with my family and friends but not everyday, we don’t talk about it alot with my family, but to know the news, only about one time per month. Even though we didn’t talk about it, it’s always the only thing in our minds, we all faced the same difficulties. One time when my little daughter had a psychotic episode at night she was frightened and cried out calling me (mama ISIS is coming to kill me), so we told our social assistant about it, then we saw a psychologist told him about it. it was only one time when we newly arrived here that we told our assistant. 
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
“I” Did you discuss it with psychologists? 
“R” Yes. 
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
“I” Did you discuss it with journalists? 
“R” No. 
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
“I” With a lawyer? 
“R” No. 
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
“I” With the police? 
“R” No. 
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
“I” Since you arrived here, how often do you seek information about what’s happening in Iraq with ISIS? 
“R” Yes, i want to have TV and to know what’s happening. 
“I” Do you seek information on Facebook? 
“R” No, i don’t have Facebook, because i don’t want the children to get used to it, i’m always afraid that they would find something horrible that ISIS did and post it there. 
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
“I” Do you call your family and relatives? 
“R” Yes of course, i want to know what’s happening, and if there is any news about the captives children, if they could escape or if they’re alive or dead. 
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
“I” How do you call your family and friends? 
“R” By whatsapp and Viber and sometimes phone calls. i have no TV or radio at my home. 
“I” Do you call some of your relatives to envoy your messages to your family or to ask about them? 
“R” Yes. 
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
“I” Now we’ll ask you about your captivity, but if you don’t feel ok to tell us, then you can stop and take a break, you don’t have to say everything?  
“R” I want to know what happened with my 17 years old son and my husband, ISIS came, handcuffed and blindfolded them with the shooting on their feet and all around us to stop us from resistance they took them away from me, since that day i know nothing about them, i’m afraid they  were killed, my son never called me (nor called his friends). After taking all men at 1am they drove us all women and kids to Mosul, at 2am  we arrived there they put us all in a big hotel they gathered us all to be seated on a big coach, then took us photos, after spending 2 days there without water or food, kids were starving and getting sick of dirtiness and the very bad conditions, there were some of them dying, in one morning a lot of them came with their arms they spread in all around us, ordered us to unveil off our faces and heads, when they liked any of us they ordered her to get up, they kicked us and stepped on us and shooted in the air till they disappeared with the girls. while they were  with the girls, the shooting and kids crying sounds are still in my ears, i’ll never forget that day. 
“I” How long did you spend in captivity? 
“R” 7 months. 
“I” How did you flee? 
“R” We came to Tal-Afar it was the filthiest place ever, there no toilets, nor water, animals stables were much more cleaner than that place, oneday i got angry and told one of the fighters why doesn’t he bring his family to live there and live like us, will they stand it like us, he was very aggressive with me and hit me, i told him to kill me better than to live in that hell, then he tried my daughter who is in kindergarten now but i pulled her strongly off his hands, she cried a lot till she lost her voice and her face color turned into blue. We were in Kezlekia when ISIS drove us back to Mosul where we stayed 27 days, then the deported us to Syria, they took my son to Raqqa, and me with another 6 women with their kids to Aleppo underground presion, it was many rooms inside each other, they locked us in with many locks on the door, they came only to throw us some bread, just like animals, then they locked the door again, there was no water no food no cleanliness, kids were dying of coldness, they were starving and got many (skin illnesses and lice in all around their hair and bodies), we all wished to die and not to live that life .
“I” Did you escape from Aleppo presion? 
“R” Yes, it was cold and rainy day when my kids told me that the prison door is unlocked, i checked it, and doubted that ISIS forgot it open, i told them that ISIS did it purposely when they’d come and found it like this, they would shoot us all inside the presion, we waited till night, no one came, so i took some rotten bread, 2 bottles of water and 2 diapers, put my 4 years old daughter on a my shoulder, and the daughter on the other shoulder and set off, we were very afraid we didn’t dare to turn on the light, after we walked a little bit i fell into a deep hole on big rocks in the bottom. 
“I” You were just walking or running away, did you wait someone to show you the way? 
“R” No, i ran away without waiting or looking behind, we ran away at that cold night, kids were shivering of the coldness, hanger and fear till the dusk, we throw ourselves into a civilians house in that village, i begged them and kissed their hands to help me out of there, they asked who we are and what was our story, i told them everything, they didn’t dare to hid us in their home so they shew us a deserted house to stay in till the morning, we stayed at that house i was dying of horror that those civilian might snitch on us to ISIS and inform them on our place, it was very cold and frightening night, then the civilian man had came with his mother and offered us some food, but we didn’t trust them to eat, then they brought us Arabs black dresses to put on and they accompanied us all the way to Kurdistan, on the checkpoints the fighters didn’t check us because those men all were friends, it took us one hour and a half till we arrived to the borders it was all for money, this family has negotiated to guide me the way to the borders for 3000$ which my brother would pay them, (it was from Bab city where i crossed to the Turkish lands, and from Turkey i came back to Afrin city in Syria, where the Asayish and PKK had drove me to my family in Khanka in Kurdistan. 
“I” Thanks for telling us your story, you’re so strong to flee in this way and to stand all that hardships. 
“R” And what’s the use if i left my children behind, if i would have brought them with me, my life here would have been much better. 
“I” How many kids you have? 
“R” I have 3 kids here, and 3 there, 2 sons, a little daughter and my husband, they’re all still captives there, all i want is to have them again, and if i won’t, i would die brokenhearted.          
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
“I” Has that experience affected your health? 
“R” Oh yes of course, i’m a living corps, i feel like my brain boils, my shoulders are always in pains, maybe i’d have a heart attack,my heart would stop beating because of the nerves and grief that are burning inside me for my kids.
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
“I” How much has that experience affected your health? 
“R” Very much, my whole body is in pains, they told me that have got an inflammation in my bones that's why they are so fragile now it’s all  because of the anger and and sorrows ,i can’t even walk, i hardly can walk my kids to the kindergarten which is very far, especially because there is no train, i have so much headaches, my knees too are in pains.  
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
“I” Do you feel like your body is numb?
“R” Yes, i feel dizzy, stop from thinking, like i’m not aware of what i’m doing, sometimes when i walk in away suddenly i lose my awareness of which way i wanted to go, i look around and take another. 
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
“I” Do you have disorder problems like you can’t walk?
“R” Yes, very much especially after i fell down in the snow while i was heading to the kindergarten pushing my kids carriages, i couldn’t manage the 2 carriages of my 2 kids so i fell down in the snow and hurt my back, i have been in pains since that time, if i had had my eldest son and my husband, i wouldn’t have suffered so much. 
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
“I” Do you feel dizzy and lose consciousness? 
“R” Yes, a lot of times i feel dizzy, but i don’t lose my consciousness, but i always feel completely numb and sweat too much and i always have that pains in my shoulders and my head, it happens a lot, at this moments i‘m sweating too much and i can’t move, when i did urine test, there were blood in it, they told me that i have acute infections.    
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
“I” Do you have vision, hearing, or smelling problems? 
“R” I can’t see the tiny things yes, otherwise no.  
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
“I” Do you have breathing troubles? 
“R” Yes, i feel suffocated very much. 
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
“I” Do you have heart problems?
“R” I did X-rays, doctor said that i have quick heart pulses.   
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
“I” Do you have gastrointestinal problems? 
“R” Yes, i have colon, my stomach swells like pregnant, it’s a lot too.   
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
“I” Do you have any other symptoms? 
“R” I have inflammation of the urethra, headaches, backaches, so much pain in my shoulders.  
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
“I” How do you explain these effects? 
“R” It’s because of the overthinking and grieving on my lost family, and because of the tiresome, if i had my son or husband they would have helped me with the kids, i really can’t take them to the kindergarten everyday it’s very tiring i can’t move and walk, i’m really getting tired with that. 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
“I” How that overthinking and sorrow has affected you?
“R” Yes, because i have too much pains inside, out of 10 persons now i have no one, my family all disappeared, but my bones inflammation makes my body sweat , that has some sickness that i don’t know, and not because of psychological causes.   
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
“I” Do you think it’s because of physical causes? 
“R” Yes, from both of them, i got physically tired of doing my hommes errands. 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
“I” Do you think it’s because of black magic causes? 
“R” No. 
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
“I” Do you think that God is punishing you? 
“R” I agree it’s all doomed, but my bones infection isn't God who did it, it’s all because of the depress and overthinking. 
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
“I” Does that experience affect your social relations? do you talk the people as before? 
“R” When i call my family, me and my kids are getting upset and cry a lot, therefore i don’t call them a lot.   
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
“I” Does that experience affect your relations with Yazidi? 
“R” No, it doesn’t, it’s normal discussions and good ones. 
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
“I” Does that experience affect your faith in God? 
“R” No, nothing will ever change my faith in God or in my religion, i still strongly believe in God and my religion. 
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
“I” How do you cope with your stress and depress? 
“R” I cry a lot till i calm down, then i go out to sit in parks, if i didn’t go out, i would have maybe blown up.  
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
“I” What do you do to feel better? like talking to your kids!
“R” I talk to my kids and i do my best in raising them up, i always worry about them i don’t know how will they manage their lives to grow up without having a father or brother, after couple of years i’ll pass away, then who will take care of them.  
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
“I” Does the thinking of Yazidi , your family and your religion give you strength? 
“R” Yes, it does. 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
“I” Do you believe in your personal strength? 
“R” Yes, i do my best in everything and till the end. 
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
“I” Does praying helps you to get stronger? 
“R” Yes, it does, i always do. 
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
“I” Do you prefer being on your own or being with people? 
“R” I like to be with the people, when i sit by myself i think of my family and get depressed and it just makes worse. 
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
“I” Do you try to avoid its memories? 
“R” I’ll never forget it, it’s not a simple thing to be forgettable, i can’t forget my kids, they’re always in my mind all day and all night. 
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
“I” Do you share your stories with people? and does it help? 
“R” Yes i like to speak out hoping to feel better, on the contrary it warms all my emotions and makes it worse. 
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
“I” Does the speaking with psychologists help you in being relieved a little bit? 
“R” They asked questions, and i answer, but i don’t feel much better, nothing can help us out of this. 
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
“I” When you talk to your Yazidi friends, do they help you in making it easier? 
“R” No, nothing can be changed. 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
“I” Do you have any other strategy that help you? 
“R” No, there is nothing at can help me to forget, how could i forget my whole family none of them left, no contacts no friends, nothing at all, i do want to forget a little bit, but i can’t.  
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
“I” Do you take anti depression medications? 
“R” The doctor gave me some, i took them and they make me fall asleep like a dead, therefore i don’t take them now, they don’t help me. 
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
“I”Do the psychologists help you? 
“R” I go to see him every thursday and i tell him all my story and we talk for hours, but that doesn’t help me. 
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
“I” Are the therapists individual or collective? 
“R” Individual, each person talks about herself for hours, but it doesn’t help.
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
“I” Did you visit Lalsh, and does it help being there? 
“R” Yes, i went there, and i prayed so much for my kids and asked God to bring them back to me, to make them in safe.    
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
“I” Do you take herbal medicine? 
“R” No.
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
“I” Do the social assistants help you or not?
“R” Yes, they’re very helpful and good with us.  
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
“R” Did you see doctors here, were they helpful? 
“R” Yes, they’re very helpful. 
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
“I” You mentioned that social assistants help you, how do they help you?
“R” Yes, if we need anything they serve us with our daily needs. Germans in general are very good. 
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
“I” What kind of professional help would you like to get, but you haven’t yet? 
“R” I need someone to take my kids to the kindergarten, i really can’t accompany them, my whole body is in pains. I have another 2 daughters one of them 16 years old, and the other is 20 years old, ISIS tortured them savagely they hit them and hit their heads strongly and poured cold water on their heads while it was very cold in the winter, the result is that they have mental problems and psychological conditions now so they’re in the hospital, because i can’t take care of them, German adopted them and they’re taking care of them now.
“I” Do you visit them? 
“R” Yes, i go to see them twice a month, i take them some food and clothes and go there.     
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
“I” Now we will mention you specific disorders, and you will tell us how strong do you have any of them during the last 7 days? 
“R” Ok
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
“I” When you think of it all ISIS photos and that memories come back to your mind like you back there and you still have the same feelings of fear and upset? 
“R”Yes, their photos and memories are still in my mind with the same horror and pains, i can’t get over it,i still have it all, very much 
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
“I” Do you have sleeping troubles? 
“R” I hardly can sleep sometimes just 10 minutes a day, whenever i sleep i have nightmares about how ISIS caught us, tortured us, the presion , the kids crying having no water or food to give them, it’s always before my eyes. 
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
“I” Do you meet anything in streets or anywhere that make you remember ISIS? 
“R” Yes, when i meet bearded men or women with black cloaks in the market or street i get very angry and if i can i’d drink their blood not only kill them. Germany is full of ISIS. 
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
“I” Are you easily irritable and easily get angry? 
“R” Yes, very much and pray that ISIS will live through worse than that hell we’ve been through. 
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
“I” Do you try not to be upset of those reminders? 
“R” It’s very difficult to ignore them or not to be upset, but in the end i know it’s something i can’t fix or control by myself.
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
“I” Do you think of it, even when you don’t mean to? 
“R” Yes, it’s always in mind. 
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
“I” Do you feel like everything had happened to you is like a dream? 
“R” No, it’s not a dream, it’s real, it’s all our fact. 
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
“I” Do you try to stay away from the reminders? 
“R” I can’t avoid it, i can’t forget it not even for a single minute, our children our captives are always in my mind, all i wish to happen is ISIS to be held to justice, to be wiped away off Germany and Iraq, and our captives to be free. 
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
“I” Are their pictures pop into your mind? 
“R” Yes, they’re still in my mind.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
“I” Do you easily get frightened and startled? 
“R” Yes, at night, i have a lot of nightmares of ISIS gathering around me, only at night, but in the morning no, and we fear of walking in the street, because all these areas are all full of them, German has too many of ISIS, you too be careful and bear in your mind that what had happened to us won’t be repeated with you.    
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
“I” Do you try not to think of it?
“R” I can not, it’s very difficult, it’s something out of my control? i cry so much then i go out, if i didn’t, i would die of sadness and depress.  
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
“I” Do you feel sometimes you don’t care about anything at all? 
“R” No, i don’t. 
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
“I” Do you act like you were back to that time? 
“R” Yes, it happened with me.  
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
“I” Do you have sleeping problems? 
“R” I can’t sleep, i think of my kids too much, i can’t stop worrying. 
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
“I” Do you have strong feelings about them now? 
“R” Yes, i get very upset now, very angry and i cry too much then i go out, it’s difficult out of 10 members of the family, now we are only 3 sitting on the table eating together, we wonder where are they are they aalive, are they hungry….
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
“I” Do you try to remove it from your mind? 
“R” No, i can’t, it’s impossible, never.  
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
“I” Do you feel more cautious than before, or more sensitive of voices like buses voices are more annoying from before? 
“R” Yes, i get upset very much of the voices.  
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
“I” Do you try not to talk about it?  
“R” No, i always want to talk about it. 
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
“I” Can you tell us what are the most positive things about your life in Germany? 
“R” Germany is very good with us, we had no supporter no one at all who could help us in Iraq, we were homeless, now Germany is supporting my kids with sum of money, we are safe in our home, it’s a little bit small otherwise everything is good here.  
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
“I” How satisfied would you say you are with this project? 
“R” I’m very satisfied, it’s very good.   
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” What are the three most positive aspects of this project?
“R” Everything is good. 
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” What are the three most negative aspects about this project? 
“R” None, I haven’t seen anything bad about it to say it. 
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?
 “I” What gives you hope for the future, what will make your future better? 
“R” Only by my kids and husband coming back to me my life and future will be much better, they’re still captive don’t know what they’re doing, are they still alive or no, i’ll have a good future with having them again. 
“I” Now we finished the interview, do you still have anything at all to tell us about? 
“R” I live in a very tight place, one room with 4 kids, the project assistants are very helpful they told me that after 3 years i’d get a house, in general all assistants and Germany is very good with us, and most important thing is i hope you will do your best to liber my kids and husband, i’ll die because of grieve on them, i wish that you’ll help me by bringing them here. 
“I” We are doing these interviews to deliver your pains and voice to the government it might consider and think of a solution to help you.