Instructions for using this template 
This template provides the interview questions as they appeared in the questionnaire in English, Kurmanji, and German. Three people were present during each interview: an Interviewer speaking English or German, an Interpreter translating the questions to Kurmanji, and a Respondent giving her response in Kurmanji. Under each question, please transcribe the question as it was explained in Kurmanji by the Interpreter, and the Respondent’s complete response. It is not necessary to transcribe what the Interviewer says in English or German. 
Please transcribe directly into English. Transcribe the words verbatim, i.e. exactly as the Interpreter or Respondent says them, even if they are not in perfect English. 
Format: Mark the Interpreter’s words with “I:” and the Respondent with “R:” – e.g.
I: How old are you? 
R: I am 42. 
Skipped questions: Some of the questions are skipped in each interview – if the question is not asked, please skip ahead to the next question that is asked.
Unclear words: Any word that you can’t hear clearly or don’t understand should be marked in Red text. 
Reviewers: Please add your notes, clarifications, and corrections in Blue text directly after the response. 
File naming: Transcribers, please save this file with the same number as the title of the audio file and your initials, e.g. “001 ZY”. Reviewers, please save the file by adding your initials to the end of the file name, e.g. “001 ZY VO”.
File sending: Inform HHI by email when you are ready to send the file. HHI will request the file from you using Accellion. Accellion works best in Internet Explorer. You may need to update your version of Internet Explorer in order to use all features of Accellion. 
Audio file name: [Each file name has a number. Please put the number here]
RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	RESPONDENT CHARACTERISTICS	EIGENSCHAFTEN DES BEFRAGTEN
C00 I would now like to ask you some short questions about yourself.	C00 Ez dixwazim bi hin pirsên derheqe we dest pê bikim.	C00 Ich möchte damit anfangen, Ihnen einige kurze Fragen zu Ihrer Person zu stellen.
C01 Sex of respondent	C01 Zayenda bersivdarî/ê	C01 Geschlecht der/des Befragten
[This does not need to be transcribed]
C02 How old are you?	C02 Tu çend salî yî?	C03 Wie alt sind Sie?
They speak the first few questions in Deutsch, but what i understood of them she is young and not married 
C04 What is your marital status?	C04 Tu zewiciyi  yan na?	C04 Wie ist Ihr Familienstand?
C05 If married or in a partnership, where is your spouse or partner?	C05 Heger tu zewicîyi , navê jina/mêrê we çi ye? / “Heger hûn zewicî ne, mêrê / zilamê te li ku derê ye?”	C05 Falls Sie verheiratet oder in einer Partnerschaft sind, wo befindet sich Ihr(e) Partner(in)?
C06 How many people currently live with you, if any?	C06 Vêga çend kes bi te re dijîn?	C06 Wie viele Menschen leben derzeit bei Ihenn (falls zutreffend)?
C07 Who are they?	C07 Ew kî ne?	C07 Und wer sind diese Personen?
C08 Please specify who lives with you	C08 Tu dikeri biji ki bi tero dijine (jiyendibe)?	C08 Bitte benne die Personen, die mit Ihnen zusammen leben?
C09 Can you read and write a simple message in any language?	C09 Tu dikarî di zimanekê de hevokek sivik bixwînîn û binivîsîn?	C09 Können Sie eine einfache Nachricht in einer beliebigen Sprache lesen und schreiben?
C10 What is your highest education level?	C10 Herî dawî tu çûyî kîjan dibistanê (mektebê)?- bilindtrin dereje xandine tu gishti	C10 Was ist Ihr höchster Schulabschluss?
C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Please specify your highest education level	C11 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren höchsten Schulabschluss
C12 Are you currently in school?	C12 Tu nahe ji xwendevan î (talebe)?	C12 Gehen Sie derzeit zur Schule?
C13 If not, do you plan to attend school in the future?	C13 Ger tu ne xwendevan bî,  tu dixwazî di dema bê de biçî dibistanê?	C13 Falls nicht, planen Sie in der Zukunft zur Schule zu gehen?
C14 Are you currently employed?	C14 Tu nahe kar diki?	C14 Sind Sie derzeit berufstätig?
C15 If yes, what is your current work?	C15 Ger te got erê, tu vêga çi karî dikî?	C15 Wenn ja, was ist Ihre aktuelle Arbeit?
C17 If not, are you seeking employment?	C17 Ger te got na, tu dixwazî karik biki?	C17 Wenn nicht, suchen Sie eine Arbeit?
C18 If not, why not?	C18 Ger te got na, tu çima naxwazî kar biki?	C18 Falls nein, warum nicht?
C19 And before ISIS, were you employed outside of your home?	C19 Beriya hijouma DAIŞ, tu qet kar kir?	C19 Übten Sie vor dem IS-Angriff eine bezahlte Arbeit aus?
C20 If yes, what was your work?	C20 Ger te got erê, te çi karî dikir?	C20 Wenn ja, was war Ihre Arbeit?
C21 I have a couple more questions about yourself. Remember, our interview is confidential	C21 Ez ê çend pirsên din ji te bikim Bizanibe ku haya tu kesî wê ji hevpeyvîna me nebe	C21 Ich habe noch ein paar Fragen an Sie. Denken Sie daran, dass unser Interview vertraulich ist
C22 What is your religious faith, if any?	C22 dine te chiya?	C22 Was ist Ihr religiöser Glaube (falls vorhanden)?
“I” What is your religion ?
“R”  Yazidi .
C23 Please specify your religion	C23 xere xwe beje dine te chiye	C23 Bitte benennen Sie Ihren Glauben
C24 How would you identify your ethnic group?	C24 Tu ji kîjan milletê yî?	C24 Wie würden Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe identifizieren?
“I” What people do you belong to ? Arab, Kurd…? 
“R” Yazidi .
C25 Please specify your ethnic group	C25 xere xwe beje milet e te chiye?	C25 Bitte benennen Sie Ihre ethnische Gruppe
PRIORITIES AND CURRENT CONDITIONS	Pêşik û Şertên niha	Prioritäten und aktuelle Bedingungen
D00 Thank you for these answers. I would now like to discuss your current priorities and views on the future	D00 Spas ji bo bersivan. Niha, ez dixazim derheqê pêşik û nêrînên tê yên dahatûyî biaxivim	D00 Vielen Dank für diese Antworten. Ich möchte jetzt Ihre aktuellen Prioritäten und Ansichten über die Zukunft besprechen
D01 What are your immediate concerns and priorities in your life today?	D01 Di jiyana te, omniyat u hazin e te chiye?	D01 Was sind heute Ihre unmittelbaren Anliegen und Prioritäten in Ihrem Leben?
“I” What are your priorities and wishes in your life ?
“R” To rejoin my family, and nothing wrong will ever happen to us again . 
D02 What do you need most to rebuild your life?	D02 tu pedvi chi goh jiyane te pe ava bibe?	D02 Was benötigen Sie am meisten um Ihr Leben wieder aufzubauen?
“I” What do you need to rebuild your life ?
“R” To my family join me here, and finish school and get marry .
D03 Overall, how much control would you say you have over your life now?	D03 Giştî, tu di jiyana xwe de çiqas saitere(xodan beryari) te heye?	D03 Wieviel Kontrolle haben Sie jetzt im Großen und Ganzen über Ihr Leben?
I Now we have some questions, your answers should be according to these number ? you can add your comments too if you want .
“R” Ok .
“I” How much control do you have over your life ? or does someone else responsible for your life decisions instead of you ?
“R” Yes, i decide everything but i ask my mother in Iraq for an advice . 
“I” Who is still captive by ISIS from your family ?
“R“ My father, brother and eldest sister . my mother, 2 sisters and a brother are free in camps in Iraq .
D04 What do you think the future holds for you?	D04 Tu mostaqbal de çi difikirî? Mostaqbal che ji tere hazirkriye?	D04 denken Sie, wie sieht Ihre Zukunft aus?
D05 Given four choices and assuming the situation in Iraq improves, where would you rather live?	D05 Li Iraqê rewş baş bibe û chwar extiyare te hebin, tu yê li ku derê bijî?	D05 Angenommen, dass sich die Situation im Irak verbessert, wo würden Sie lieber leben?
“I” Suppose the situation improved in Iraq, would you go back there or stay in Germany ?
“R” No, i will stay here, after what i’ve seen i’m afraid to live there .
D06 Can you explain why you choose that location?	D06 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin hûn çima çûn wir?	D06 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie diesen Ort auswählen?
D07 Do you feel like you belong here in Germany?	D07 Tu hestdiki goh almaniya welate tebe?	D07 Fühlen Sie sich in Deutschland zu Hause?
“I” Do you feel comfortable here and you feel Germany as your life? how much ?
“R” Yes, i’m a little bit better here, 2 
D08 And overall, how would you judge your experience in Germany over the last two years?	D08 Di du salan de jiyana te ya li Almanyayê çawa derbas bû?	D08 Und wie würden Sie Ihre Erfahrungen in Deutschland in den letzten zwei Jahren beurteilen?
“I” After 2 years of living here, how do you judge your life here ?
“R” The first year was very difficult i was alone and afraid too, i didn’t speak Deutsch , so i was thinking of what happened to me and of my family, but after i found people and everything is good, i started get used to it and i’m better this year, 3 
D09 Can you explain your answer? Why do you feel this way?	D09 Tu dikarî bersiva xwe zelaltir bikî? Hûn çima wûsa hîs dikin?	D09 Können Sie Ihre Antwort erklären? Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
D10 If you were to return to Iraq or the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, what are the main changes that are needed in order for you to feel safe?	D10 Heger hûn vegerin Irakê yan jî Herêma Kurdîstan, ji bona ewlehîya(jiyanek paristi) we çi cure guhartin hewce ye?	D10 Wenn Sie zurück in den Irak oder nach Kurdistan gehen würden, was müsste sich vor allem ändern, damit sie sich sicher fühlen könnten?
“I” Suppose you were to return to Iraq, what should be changed to encourage to go back and live there ?
“R” After everything i’ve seen there, i will never feel safe again to live there .
JUSTICE AND ACCOUNTABILITY	EDALET Û BERPIRSIYARÎ	Gerechtigkeit und Verantwortlichkeit
E00 Earlier we discussed about priorities. I have a few more questions relating to that topic.	E00 Berî em derheqê pêşikên te axivîn, ez ê derheqê vê de çend pirsên din jî bikim	E00 Wir diskutierten bereits zuvor über Prioritäten, ich hätte noch mehr Fragen zu diesem Thema
E01 What does justice mean to you?	E01 Gelo ji bo we edelet wê çi be?	E01 Was bedeutet Gerechtigkeit für Sie?
“I” When i say the word Justice or your rights what comes to your mind ?
“R” We were strong to live through that hell, i only want my my rights back and never be lost . ( to get justice ) .
E02 How much of a priority is it for you to have justice for what happened to you during the conflict with ISIS?	E02 Ji bona tiştên ku hatin serê we di dema şerê DAEŞê de bidestxistina edeletê ji we re çiqas girîng (muhim)e?	E02 Wie hoch ist die Priorität für Sie, Gerechtigkeit für das zu erhalten, was Ihnen während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” Do you want ISIS to held accountable for what they’ve done to you and get punished ?
“R” Even it’s very difficult to me to say  because they human too, but the violations they committed against me didn’t left any mercy in my heart for them, yes i want them to held accountable and to execused .
E03 How optimistic are you that you will ever get justice?	E03 Ji bona bidestxistina edeleta hûn çiqas gesh (positiv) (mutafael) in?	E03 Wie optimistisch sind Sie, dass Sie jemals Gerechtigkeit erhalten werden?
“I” How optimistic are you that you will get justice ?
“R” I’m not optimistic, i don’t believe that they will never get  punished . 
E04 And how important is it for you that the persons who committed or perpetrated violence against civilians during the conflict with ISIS are held accountable for their actions?	E04 bu te (ji tere) chiqes muhime goh daishe li seri we kiri, bikevin ber dari adalete?	E04 Und wie wichtig ist es für Sie, dass diejenigen, die für die Gewalt gegen Zivilisten während des Konflikts mit IS verantwortlich sind, für ihre Handlungen zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” How important is it for you to get justice ?
“R” It’s very important .
E05 Can you explain why you answered this way?	E05 Gelo hûn dikarin bibêjin we çima wûsa bersiv da?	E05 Können Sie erklären, warum Sie es so beantwortet haben?
“I” Why ?
“R” Because we never did anything wrong to anyone, and we’ve never seen nor my father or grandfathers such inhumanity .
E06 Who should be held accountable?	E06 ki mostahaqiyi oqubeteye?	E06 Wer sollte zur Rechenschaft gezogen werden?
“I” And who should held accountable leaders or fighters ?
“R” They all should be punished .
E07 And how should they be held accountable?	E07 çawa?	E07 Und wie sollten sie verantwortlich gemacht werden?
“I” And how do you want them to get punished ?
“R” Execution .
E08 Are you aware of any current efforts to bring to justice those responsible for the violence?	E08 hun zanin naha ki pirsiyere haqi we dike?	E08 Wissen Sie von aktuellen Bemühungen diejenigen zur Rechenschaft zu ziehen, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Have you heard that any of ISIS got punished in other countries ?
“R” No, i haven’t .
E09 If yes, which ones?	E09 Heger cewaba we erê be, kîjan in?	E09 Falls ja, von welchen?
E10 Is it possible to forgive those responsible for the violence?	E10 win dikarin wen zalime afubikin?	E10 Ist es möglich, denjenigen zu vergeben, die für die Gewalt verantwortlich sind?
“I” Is it possible that you might forgive those criminals ?
“R” No .
E11 If no, what should happen before you can forgive?	E11 Ger te got na, gerek che bibe goh tu bikare wen afubiki?	E11 Wenn nein, was muss passieren, bevor Sie vergeben können?
“I” What should be done to make forgive them ?
“R” Nothing can make me forgive them, i can’t .
E12 I have a few more questions related to this topic.	E12 naha hin pirsiyame heye	E12 Ich habe ein paar Fragen im Zusammenhang mit diesem Thema
E13 How important is it for you to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E13 chiqas ji tere muhime tu  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E13 Wie wichtig ist es für Sie persönlich zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit dem IS passiert ist?
“I” How important is it for you to know what’s happening in ISIS-Iraq war now ?
“R” Yes, It’s important to know . 
“I” Was your telephone ringing ?
“R” Yes .
E14 How important is it to you that the rest of the world knows about what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E14 chiqas ji tere muhime xelik  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E14 Und wie wichtig ist es Ihnen, dass der Rest der Welt erfährt, was während des Konflikts mit IS geschah?
“I” How important is it for you to let the rest of the world to know about what ISIS did to to you Yazidi ?
“R” It’s very important .
E15 And what about future generations? How important is it for them to know what happened during the conflict with ISIS?	E15 chiqas ji tere muhime zarok u neviye te  zanibi (bizani)  che biye(qawimiye) di shere daish de?	E15 Und was ist mit zukünftigen Generationen? Wie wichtig ist es für die zukünftige Generationen zu wissen, was während des Konflikts mit IS passiert ist?
“I” What about the future generation ?
“R”  Yes, it’s important .
“I” Why ?
“R” I don’t want it to be forgettable .
E16 Can you tell me why you answered this way about you, the world and future generations knowing about what has happened?	E16 chi qe ji tere muhime ji buna hemo insan zanibin che bu?	E16 Können Sie mir sagen, warum Sie so über sich, die Welt und zukünftigen Generationen geantwortet haben?
“I” In which way it should be done to ensure that all know it and it won’t be forgettable ? like writing a book about tit ?
“R” Yes, by writing books, and do interview to get answers from people like me and like what we do now .
“I” Other possible way ?
“R” That’s it .
E17 And what should be done to ensure that future generations know about what happened?	E17 che gereke (lazime) haye hamo zarok u naviye zanibin che bu?	E17 Und was sollte getan werden, um sicherzustellen, dass künftige Generationen wissen, was passiert ist?
E18 Have you heard of a truth commission?	E18 tu bare naha ta qat bisti bi (komisiyone rastiye)(lejnet edelete)?	E18 Haben Sie schon einmal von einer Wahrheitskommission gehört?
“I” Have you heard about Truth commissions ?
“R” No .
E19 Truth Commissions investigate a pattern of crimes over a period of time, they are temporary and end with a report, and they are officially created by the government of the country. Do you think it is appropriate to have a truth commission for ISIS crimes?	E19 Komîsyonê rastîyê (lejnet edelete) li ser rojed pashi (bori) (maddi) fehse wen digrin chu kare e ne bash bi xelkero biye di waxteki u ew komisyona (committee) karixwe xeles dike w pishte dinifsine.Komîsyonê rastîyê bi navi hukmete welate che dibe.nirine te chiye ji bo komisiyonek e rastiye hebe ji daishre?	E19 Wahrheitskommissionen untersuchen vergangene Verbrechen über einen bestimmten Zeitraum. Sie arbeiten zeitlich begrenzt und schreiben am Ende einen Bericht. Sie werden offiziell durch den Staat (Regierung des Landes) gebildet. Denken Sie, dass es angemessen ist, eine Wahrheitskommission für IS-Verbrechen einzurichten?
“I” It’s a committee of specialists who do researches about a specific pattern of crimes after finding out how real were the violations they write down the details with the specific dates of that crimes, do you think Iraqi authorities should send such a committee to investigate about ISIS crimes, do you think it’s a good job to do ? 
“R” Yes, of course .
E20 In general, what do you think should be done for victims of ISIS?	E20 nirine te chiye, gerek(lazime) che bibe ji bo dehiyet (qorban) e daish?	E20 Im Allgemeinen, was denken Sie, was für die Opfer von IS getan werden sollte?
“I” You know that there are alot of Yazidi and non Yazidi victims, what should be done to help those people ?
“R” Yes there are Shias, Christians, we all need get justice and our rights must not be lost .
E21 And what should be done specifically for the Yazidis?	E21 Û bi taybetî ji bo Ezidîya gereke (lazime) che bibe?	E21 Und was sollte speziell für die Jesiden getan werden?
“I” What about Yazidi victimes what should be done to help them ?
“R” New programs should be found to help them to treat them, not only me, there are alot of Yazidi in Iraq are lost have no parents no homes nothing at all, they should get care .
E22 And yourself, do you feel recognized as a victim?	E22 Gelo hûn xwe wekî qûrbanek dibinen?	E22 Und Sie, fühlen Sie sich als Opfer anerkannt?
“I” Do you recognize yourself as a victim too ?
“R” Yes, at the beginning i felt it that way, but afterwards i found it useless, so i standed on my feet and started fighting, now i don’t see myself as a victim .
“I” What about the people do they recognize you and call you an ISIS victim, do they respect you ?
“R”  Yes, i heard a lot of people saying that i’m ISIS victim this bad reputation will stay forever with me half of the people see me like that, but i don’t look down to myself .
E23 Why do you feel that way?	E23 Hûn çima wiha (wilo) xwe dibinin?	E23 Warum haben Sie dieses Gefühl?
PEACE	Aşitî	Frieden
F00 Thinking about the situation in Iraq and how to move forward, I wanted to ask you a few questions.	F00 Bi nirxandina rewşa Iraqê û bi pesh chubun ez dixwazimhin pirsan bipirsim.	F00 Ich würde Ihnen jetzt noch ein paar Fragen zur Situation im Irak stellen und wie man diese Situation verbessern könnte.
F01 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq?	F01 Di fikra we de, li Iraqê aşitiyek direj mumkun e (e hebe)?	F01 Ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?
“I” In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in Iraq ?
“R”  No .
F02 In your opinion, is it possible to have a lasting peace in the middle east region, across all countries?	F02 Û li  fikra we (nirine we), gelo li( sharq awsat)(dewlete araba) e aşitiyeke direj bibe , li her  welêtiki?”	F02 Und ist es Ihrer Meinung nach möglich, in allen Ländern des Nahen Ostens dauerhaften Frieden zu bewahren?"
“I” What about other countries in the Middle East, like Syria ?
“R”  It’s possible all wars in the world finish, but in Iraq, it will never get peace , neither Syria . i don’t know about other countries .
F03 What should be done to build lasting peace in Iraq?	F03 Ji bo  aşitiyak direj hebe li iraqe,gerek (lazim) che bibe?	F03 Was muss getan werden, um im Irak dauerhaften Frieden zu schaffen?
“I”  What should be done in Iraq to get lasting peace and justice, like a new good minister to come ?
“R”  Yes, of course if the minister was good, that problems wouldn't had happened to us, Yazidi never had their own rights, always Muslims committed violations against Yazidi.  
F04 How do you feel about the current military campaign against ISIS?	F04 Hûn bi che dihesin (hun chawa dikin)li hemberî kampanya (hecum) esker (leshker) diji daishe?	F04 Was denken Sie über die aktuelle militärische Kampagne gegen den IS?
“I”  Have you heard about some fighters fighting against ISIS ( the military campaign against ISIS) ?
“R”  No, i haven’t .
F05 And what do you think should be done to protect Yazidis and other minorities in Iraq?	F05 Û  ji bona parastina Ezîdîya û miletin din li Iraqê gereke (lazim) chi bibe?	F05 Und was denken Sie, sollte getan werden, um die Jesiden und andere Minderheiten im Irak zu schützen?
“I” What should be done to protect Yazidi in Iraq ?
“R” To be secured, 
“I” What do you mean by security ?
“R” I mean we are all human that religious racism should be removed, In Iraq we are always afraid of Muslims, they always disturb us and want us to convert our religion . 
NARRATIVES AND MEMORIALIZATION	VEGOTIN Û PÎROZBAHÎ	Erzählungen und Mahnmale
G00 We just discussed about truth and knowing what happened during the conflict. I have a few questions about your own experience of sharing what you lived through.	G00 wexte tu qisete xwe bi daishere ji miletere beji,ew milete e te jero guti che geweb dide te?G00 Wir diskutierten gerade über Wahrheit und wissen, was während des Konflikts passierte. Ich habe ein paar Fragen darüber, wie sie das erlebt haben, wenn Sie über Ihre Erfahrung berichtet haben.
G01 Since you came to Germany, how often have you discussed with anyone your experiences during the conflict with ISIS?	G01 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çend caran tecribeyên xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê bi kesan re denkriye (guhtiye)?	G01 Wie oft haben Sie seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind mit jemandem über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS gesprochen?
“I” Since you arrived here how often have you discussed your story with people ? 
“R” Almost everyday i talk with my mother and friends .
G02 Why do or did you discuss what happened to you?	G02 Hûn çima tiştan ku hate serê we pe dendikin (dibejin)(niqash dikin)?	G02 Warum möchten Sie nicht darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G03 Why do you never discuss what happened to you?	G03 çima hûn ticar tiştê ku hate serê we (nabejin,niqash nakin,dengnakin)	G03 Warum haben Sie nie darüber sprechen, was mit Ihnen passiert ist?
G04 Who did you discuss your experience with? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are people or groups you have spoken to.	G04 Hûn (chirok/tecrube) xwe bi kêre niqashdikin (dibejin) Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban  niqashdikin (dengdikin)	G04 Mit wem sprechen Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, mit welchen Personen oder Gruppen Sie gesprochen haben.
G05 If other, please specify	G05 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G05 Falls weitere Personen oder Gruppen, bitte benennen Sie diese.
“I” Have you discussed it with psychologists ?
“R”  Yes, few times . 
G06 If media, what kind of media outlet was it, for example radio, TV or newspaper?	G06 [Heger Medyaye] kijan bû,  (misal) radyo, TV yan ceride bu?	G06 [Falls Medien] Welche Art von Medium war es, z. B. Radio, Fernsehen oder Zeitung?
“I” What about the administrator or media ?
“R”  No.
IF LAWYER	Heger parêzer be	Falls Rechtsanwalt
G07 If you spoke to a lawyer, was it a German lawyer or an international lawyer?	G07 [Heger parêzer be](muhami) Heger we bi parêzere we axaftin kiribe(denkirbe), ew parêzerek Alman bû yan jî navnetewî (alami/ international) bû?	G07 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, war es ein deutscher oder ein internationaler Rechtsanwalt?
“I” Have you discussed it with police or lawyers ?
“R” No, i haven’t .
“I” On facebook ?
R I heard someone i don’t know wrote my story on Facebook .
G07.1 If other, please specify	G07.1 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G07.1 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G08 If you spoke to a lawyer, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G08 Heger we bi parêzerekê re axaftin çêkiribe, gelo ew hat jem we  yan  hûn chun jem ?	G08 Sofern Sie mit einem Anwalt gesprochen haben, haben Sie ihn/sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G09 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the lawyer?	G09 Hûn hîs dikin ku hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi agahîyêne e we guti bi parêzere ?	G09 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie dem Anwalt gegeben haben?
G10 Have you received any communications from the lawyer since you spoke with them?	G10 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji parêzeran girt?	G10 Haben Sie vom Anwalt irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihm/ihr gesprochen haben?
IF POLICE	[Heger shirteye)	Falls Polizei
G11 If you spoke to the police, did they approach you or did you approach them?	G11 [Heger shirteye) Heger we bi sherte re axaftin kiribe, ew hatin cem we le win chun cem wan ?	G11 [Im Fall von Polizei] Sofern Sie mit der Polizei gesprochen haben, haben Sie sie oder wurden Sie angesprochen?
G12 Do you feel you understand what will happen to the information you shared with the police?	G12  hûn fahm dikin ku dê çi bibe bi ifedete  te bi shertede deyi ?	G12 Haben Sie das Gefühl, zu verstehen, was mit den Informationen geschehen wird, die Sie der Polizei gegeben haben?
G13 Have you received any communications from the police since you spoke with them?	G13 Ji dema ku we bi wan re xeber da, we ti ragihandin (ceweb) ji sherte girt?	G13 Haben Sie von der Polizei irgendwelche Mitteilungen erhalten, seit Sie mit ihr gesprochen haben?
G14 And since you came to Germany, how often have you written about your experiences during the conflict with ISIS, for example on Facebook, twitter, in letters or in a book?	G14 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, we çiqasî di derheqê tecrubeyên (qiset) xwe yên dema şerê DAEŞê li ser facebook, twitter, nameyan yan jî di kitab de nivîsî?	G14 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen während des Konflikts mit IS -- zum Beispiel auf Facebook, Twitter, in Briefen oder in einem Buch -- geschrieben ?
G15 Why do you write about what happened to you?	G15 çima hûn behsa çi hatiye serê we dikin?	G15 Warum schreiben Sie darüber, was Ihnen passier istt?
G16 Where did you write about your experience? I will read some options to you and you can tell me which ones are places where you have written.	G16 We li ku derê tecrubeyên xwe ( qiset) nivîsî? Ez ê niha ji we re hinek bijardeyan bixwînim û hûn jî ji me re bibejin ku hûn bikêre û bi kîjan grûban re yazikir (nivisend)?	G16 Wo haben Sie über Ihre Erfahrungen geschrieben? Ich lese Ihnen eine Auswahl vor und Sie können mir sagen, wo sie darüber geschrieben haben.
G17 If other, please specify	G17 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G17 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G18 And since you came to Germany, how often have you yourself sought information about what is happening in Iraq with the conflict with ISIS?	G18 Ji dema ku hûn hatine Almanyayê, hûn çiqas li agahîyên(malumet) ku di şerê DAEŞê de çi bûye digerin?	G18 Und seit Sie nach Deutschland gekommen sind, wie oft haben Sie sich über die Ereignisse im Irak mit dem Konflikt mit IS informiert?
“I” Since you arrived here how often do you seek for information on Iraq situation, on Facebook ?
“I” At the beginning when i arrived here, i watched news on Facebook all the day, but when i saw bad news, i couldn’t sleep so i watch it less than before once a day .
G19 Why do you seek information (or why not)?	G19 Hûn çima li agahîyan (malumet) digerin (yan nagerin)?	G19 Warum suchst du Informationen (oder warum nicht)?
“I” Why do you seek information ?
“R” Because, i might see news about ISIS actions, in case someone was released it could be posted there, so i know who is out and who is still in captivity .
G20 Where do you seek information?	G20 Hûn agahîyan (malumet) li ku derê digerin?	G20 Wo informieren Sie sich?
“I” Where do you seek information on facebook ?
“R” Yes .
“I” How do you call your mother ?
“R” On Facebook .
“I” Whatsapp, messenger ?
“R” Yes . 
“I” SMS ?
“R” No .
“I” Do you call someone else to seek information about your mother when you can’t reach her ?
“R” Yes . 
“I” Take 5 minutes a break .
G21 If other, please specify	G21 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G21 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
G22 And how do you and other members of the Yazidi community communicate with each other about different issues? I will read you a list of common forms of communication; as I name them, can you tell me whether or not you use each one?	G22 hûn û  malbata Êzîdîyan çawa têdikevin nav ragihandinê (bi hevre didin u distinin)? Ez ê ji we re hin cûreyên (extiyer)ragihandinê bixwînim; dema ku ez wan binavbikim, hûn dikarin ji min re bibêjin hûn kîjani bikartînin(estemaldikin) yan na	G22 Und wie kommunizieren Sie und andere Mitglieder der jesidischen Gemeinschaft miteinander über verschiedene Themen? Ich lese Ihnen eine Liste der häufigsten Formen der Kommunikation vor. Wenn ich sie nenne, können Sie mir sagen, ob Sie diese jeweils verwenden?
G23 If other, please specify	G23 heger gutinek din heye,xere xwe beje	G23 Falls andere, bitte nennen Sie diese.
TRAUMA	TRAÛMA	TRAUMA
H00 For the last part of this interview, I would like to ask you some questions about how your experience of violence during the conflict with ISIS affects your everyday life today. I understand you have been through a lot and I also want to remind you that you don't have to talk about anything unless you feel comfortable sharing it. You can stop this interview at any time or just tell me if you don't want to answer any question.	H00 ji bu persiyane e teliye ez dixwazim pirsne din ji te pirsbikim,wexte tu di desti daish de bu,tecrube nebashbune (enef) wen bi tero chubu? Jiyane te chu bedili (gewri)	H00 Für den letzten Teil des Interviews möchte ich Ihnen einige Fragen dazu stellen, wie sich Ihre Gewalterfahrungen während des IS-Konflikts heute auf Ihren Alltag auswirken. Ich verstehe, dass Sie viel durchgemacht haben, und ich möchte Sie daran erinnern, dass Sie nicht über alles reden müssen, es sei denn, Sie fühlen sich damit wohl. Bitte sagen Sie mir jederzeit, wenn Sie das Interview beenden möchten, und wenn es irgendwelche Fragen gibt, die Sie lieber nicht beantworten.
VIOL1 What can you tell us about the time you spent in captivity with ISIS?	VIOL1 Hûn dikarin ji bo dema ku hûn di destê DAEŞê de bûn çi bibêjin?	VIOL1 Was können Sie uns über die Zeit sagen, die Sie in IS-Gefangenschaft verbracht haben?
“I” Now we get to your captivity story, you can tell us whatever you want and make you relieved, and if you can’t speak it’s ok we can stop whenever you want ?
“R” I have a long story, it won’t be finished in days, what do you want to know ? 
“I” Ok, you can start .
“R” When ISIS broke into the region we escaped from my village ( Hatem ) to ( Sinjar ) next day while we were planning to go back to the village, ISIS caught us, separated the men from the women and, the most difficult thing is when they took my brother and father away, the second difficult thing was when ISIS came to take the girls for themselves put us in cars and took us to ( Tal-Afer ), i didn’t believe that i would meet father and brother again, when we arrived we saw a huge crowd and said no Yazidi could escaped them , we stayed at ( Tal- Afer school ) for 5 days, without food we drank toilet water, they ordered us to convert our religion we were very shocked and prefered to be killed on conversion, we could stand it because we were with our mothers, then they transported us by buses to ( Badoosh presion ) where we slept on floor the windows were dyed we couldn’t see anything from inside, drank dirty water, newt day they brought my little brother i was so happy and asked him about my father, he said that they separated them too to different places, next day they asked us to clean the presson at 8am they gave us breakfast apiece of bread and piece of cheese, at 4pm they brought us a piece of bread and a cucumber, in the evening they came in, put lights in our eyes, and started picking us, out of fear we accepted to marry them, after 3 days, after they took my little brother and sister, the air raids started and mother told us to stand close to the door so we might be able to escape, the airplanes were shelling all around us but didn’t shelled the presion, after the air raids stopped, ISIS sent us back to ( Tal- Afer) school, we stand at the school yard and a huge fat long bearded man came, each girl lift a baby and pretended that was her son, after they took my mother and aunt, they took the children from our arms, mothers cried ISIS threatened to kill them, they filled the buses with girls and headed, we asked them where are you taking us, they replied each one will choose a girl to marry and make her Muslim, on the way they stopped us for 3 times, and highlighted in our eyes to see who was the most beautiful one , when we arrived to a christian house we saw a lot of girls there, they took us to the cellar, we asked the girls what would they do  to us, they didn’t know, then we called our families, the girls warned us to throw our phones away or they would kill us, we broke them in the toilets, next day they came back to write our names down and took our money, gold earrings, we heard that a prince would come and girl by girl would go there to see her, they wrote our names, asked for our ages and if we can read and write and put the beautiful girls apart, to take them for themselves,  they took my eldest sister to Syria, and put me and my little sister in a presion after awhile they brought in some beautiful girls from Syria then they took them again to marry them, and told us that we are from ( Baaj village ) so we were ( Baaj part ), next day 2 princes to take us, one of them looked at me and said you are mine, i cried alot and told him that i’m married, he said there is a woman whose work is to look about us for making sure if we were really married or not, they tried to seperate my little sister from me she cried a lot, i said kill me if you want, but don’t take my sister away from me, then they transported us to ( Kojo ) before i got on the bus, i changed my clothes and scarfs so he won’t recognize me again, but he came back, stand next to me and said you changed your clothes to not know you , but i recognized you , when we arrived i was happy that he didn’t come back but at night he returned and sat next to me, they brought some food , but we couldn’t eat,i changed my clothes and my name, next day i heard his voice so i lied down and hid myself under the blanket, i had a close friend who we pretend that she was my sister to stay together, he brought her and threatened me if i didn’t stand up he would kill her, so i got up and said why are you doing this to us, we parted our families, you already had wives, why do you want to marry us, you are  Muslims and we are Yazidi, we will never be Muslims, he answered we will marry you and you will be Yazidi, i said please i will do whatever you want, i will serve you, i will wash your clothes, but don’t marry me, and don’t make me Muslim, from among all the girls he pulled me from my hair out of that room, afterwards i heard that there is a girl, who had after she heard that ISIS would marry us and make us Muslims, gone into the bathroom cut her hand arteries and died, they asked us whose sister was and  to go in the bathroom to recognize her, but we couldn’t dare to go in, so they moved us all out of that house, then he came back again i begged him to keep me and little sister and my aunt who was mute all together all the time, even if they wanted to kill me, just not to seperate us, then he took me , my little sister and my aunt, to an ISIS house, we cried a lot so he came back and threatened me if we kept crying he would take my sister and aunt away from me, that night he took me to his home with his family and next day he took me back to my sister and aunt place, after a day ISIS came to tell us that they brought new girls from ( Kojo village ) and killed their men, for 3 days i stayed with his family i asked him to take me my sister place, i can’t stand staying with his family who were underestimating me by calling Yazidi with bad words and that killed my people, he answered me that he was looking for my parents asked me for their names, so he would take my sister to their place, he took me to another place with another 4 girls, there were ISIS guards . One day he came and took my 2 sisters, i was very angry and sad while i was cooking for him accidentally i burned my hands, i was very angry and disobedient i refused to carry out their orders, they tortured me because i refused to be Muslim . One day he came back to tell me that he found my parents and he will take my sister, i was very happy for my sister she was only 10 years old she will be better with mother, they took us to ( Tal-Afer ) where they joined all the survived Yazidi, we wrote parents names at ISIS office to find them for us,they found them and we were very happy to gather again but my parents were very sad when they haven’t seen my eldest sister i told them that they transported her to Syria. Then they left my sister with parents and seperated me again from them, but i was very happy to see them alive, so i planned to obey that man, he took me again to his wife’s home she was Muslim and had a son, she armed herself all the time so she can stop me from escaping, i begged her to help me to flee instead of that she confessed that to her husband, i said either i kill myself or took me to some Yazidi girls . After a few days new clashes started in Mountains with Peshmerga, under the air raids 2 of ( Baaj ) the man i stayed with had killed, ISIS came to tell me that, i was very happy to hear that, they told me not to be happy because they would send me to another man, i said if you won’t take me to my parents then take to that ISIS fighter parents place, indeed they sent me to his parents home and told them that the old couple should keep me at their home till they order to take me back sent me with a contract paper from ISIS to ensure for other fighters that i’m already owned by someone else so no one would take me again, they had another a son he came to drive me to a Syrian village between Iraq, and Syria, i prefered to live with his parents so no other man will take me again, they were very bad, i begged them to let me flee, but they didn’t, and forced me stay indoor not to contact anyone, to pray and put black dress on and didn’t let me go out for a month, and i obeyed them because they told me if i was obedient they would send me to ( Tal-Afer ) to visit my parents for 3 days, indeed they sent me with a contract paper from ISIS to ensure for other fighters that i’m already owned by someone else so no one would take me again, while i was sleeping ISIS broke into the house and yelled that that there were some who fled many times they did the same until one day new ISIS came to take me, the old couple refused and showed them the contract, but they didn’t listen and threatened to kill him then they transported me to Mosul another ISIS chose me again, i cried and told him that i’m already married, but he didn’t accept that, he sent me to stay with other girls, after 10 some came in and ordered us to stand up so they can see how tall we are and choose, i said bad words to the man who drove me to Mosul so he took off his ( Keffiyeh or something else like Akkal men put it on their heads ) and hit me with it. when they transported me to Syria other girls were younger than me they cried alot, on my way to he asked if i want some water or food i refused, i planned to run away, then i saw a big military center about 2000 of ISIS i was afraid i couldn’t,they put me again in a dark room locked the door in me, the guards brought me food, i didn’t eat and asked them my older sister who was transported to Syria, from the very beginning of their invasion, the guards answered that they knew where she is, and that next day they would take me to see her, then i asked them, why they didn’t let me go, they answered they would leave the door open ,and i can run, i knew that they were lying and testing me so i said no i won’t, they said why i answered they were good men . they were very happy and and told if they let the door open i won’t run then i stayed in Syria only one day the next day they all left no one was there, i was thirsty i looked for water i didn’t find water nor ISIS i, i wanted to escape so i broke the window and hid under the blanket i was afraid that someone heard, but none was there, so i wore black clothes and carried and bag and jumped out of the room, i walked a little till i arrived the fence where i had to climb and cross to the the street side, i was very afraid to walk in the street, there were alot of cars but none of ISIS was around i saw few women in black walking so i followed them, didn’t know  where i was heading to, in Syria there were alot of Taxis i stopped one and got on the car, the driver asked me about my destination i told him to keep driving after a while he asked me again either to give him his money or he will drop in the street after i made sure that i was away from ISIS center he asked me again where i wanted to go i didn’t anywhere in Syria but i heard of Hasaka he said that he knew nowhere except Raqqa ,then i took off my black clothes and cried told him that i was an ISIS captive and begged him to drive me to Kurdistan my family would pay him all he wanted, he said he can’t he asked if i speak kurdish i said yes then he took me to a Kurdish family to ask them for help, i told him not tell ISIS about me, i got off the car and stand in front of the kurdish family some came and asked me what i wanted then i started crying i told them that was the taxi driver put me there, they were afraid too, told me that the driver might tell ISIS that you are here but they sympathized me so they suggested me to go with their women who wore black clothes too and took me to another kurdish family in a farm who could help me more, i stayed with that family for 7 days they bought me a phone and sim card and coordinated with an Iraqian man called ( Abou Shojaa ) saved girls on, that family drove me by motorcycle to the Syrian borders then in the evening i walked for 3 hours from Syria to Turkey , i reached Turkish lands, i saw Turkish soldiers , i was very afraid, they spoke Turkish with me i couldn't understand but i knew that they were ordering me to go away, then i lied down on the floor till they disappeared, that Kurdish family bought me a phone and sim card to call an Iraqi man called ( Abou Shojaa ) who was saving girls, so i called him and he told me to get on any car there and asked them to drive me to ( Eintab garage ) that Kurdish family gave me money too, so i gave it to the driver and when i arrived to the garage i called ( Abou Shojaa ) again he told me that a Kurdish man will come to guide me the way, indeed a man came and asked me if i was (Louiza Kurdi ) i was afraid to tell him my name, he told me that he is Yazidi too,  so there is no need to be afraid then i got on the car with him and he took me to my father’s uncle place who was living in a camp in Turkey, after 2 days i arrived Iraq .      
VIOL2 How long did you spend in captivity?	VIOL2 Hûn çiqas di destê DAEŞê de man?	VIOL2 Wie lange haben Sie in Gefangenschaft verbracht?
“I” How long did you stay in captivity ?
“R” 4 months .
“I” And how long did you stay in the camp in Germany ?
“I” About 1 year .
“I” How old were you in 2014 ?
“R” ?
Speaking in Deutsch  .
VIOL3 What about your escape, would you like to share any information about  your escape?	VIOL3 Reva we (baze we), hûn dixwazin behsa reva xwe (baz dene xwe) bikin?	VIOL3 Möchten Sie uns etwas über Ihre Flucht erzählen?
H01 How has your experience of violence by ISIS affected your current health related well-being?	H01 chiqes pisbune daishe  (  ser sehete we) (saxbuna we) bedilend?	H01 Wie haben sich Ihre Erfahrungen mit Gewalt durch IS auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand ausgewirkt?
“I” Has that violent experience affected your health ? Which part of your body ?
“R” Yes, i have headaches, and my feet hurt me too because when i ran away i was barefooted, the floor was wet, and it was too cold . 2
H02 How much does the ISIS-violence you experienced affect your current health-related well-being?	H02 Gelo ev şîddeta DAÎŞê  chu saxbuna we bedilend?	H02 Wie sehr wirkt sich die erlebte IS-Gewalt auf Ihren Gesundheitszustand aus?
“I” How much does that experience change your life ?
“R” It doesn’t change, but i’m a little bit better because my mother returned too, i cry and get sad a lot of times, but when i talk to my mother i feel much better .
H03 How much are you suffering from the following symptoms as an effect of the ISIS violence you experienced?	H03 kengi ji van ekhtiyerne derdi we dibije u chiqes derd mekine?	H03 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter den folgenden Symptomen als Folge der erlebten IS-Gewalt:
“I” We will mention you some of illnesses, and you can tell how much have you got any of them after your escaping ?
“R” Ok .
H04 Pain	H04 Êş (eshek)	H04 Schmerz
H05 Parasthesia of the skin or body (e.g. abnormal sensations such as tingling, prickling, numbness, or burning of the skin with no apparent physical cause)	H05 hesesiyet lasha (govd),taviziyen	H05 Missempfindung der Haut oder des Körpers (Kribbeln, Taubheitsgefühle ohne körperliche Ursache)
“I” Since you have fled from ISIS, have you felt of tingling or numbness in your body, hands ?
“R” After i escaped from ISIS, my all body was in pain, but after i saw the doctors in Iraq, i felt better afterwards .
H06 Movement disorder (e.g. walking or coordination difficulties)	H06 Nexweşîya Livindanê (misal. Tu dikeri bi dest w linge xwe bimeshi u rabi u runi)	H06 Bewegunsstörungen (z.B. Gangstörung, Koordinationsstörung)
“I” Have you got movement troubles, like you can’t walk ?
“R” Yes, when i walk long distances, my leds hurt me alot, 5 
H07 Dissociative seizures (i.e. losing consciousness or fainting without physical cause or sudden involuntary muscle contractions or trembling)	H07 be fehse taxtora dista du behs be  herzin/dejerfen	H07 Dissoziative (Krampf-) Anfälle (z.B. Ohnmacht ohne körperliche Ursache / Zittern / unwillkürliche Muskelkontraktionen)
“I” Do you have dizziness of fainting ?
“R” Yes, i feel dizzy sometimes, but i don’t faint .
H08 Functional limitations (e.g. blurred vision, hearing impairments, smelling disorder)	H08 tu hes deke misal debsi, dibne, bindki	H08 Funktionseinschränkungen (z.B. Seh-, Hör-, oder Riechstörungen)
“I” Do you have seeing or hearing problems ?
“R” Yes, my eyes were in pain, so i went to the doctor and i’m wearing glasses now .
Speaking in Deutsch 
H09 Feeling of suffocation (e.g. shortness of breath, difficulty breathing)	H09 bena(nafs) ta tang debe	H09 Erstickungsgefühle (z.B. Schwierigkeiten zu Atmen)
H10 Dizziness (e.g. sensation of spinning around or losing balance)	H10 gejbun (bidewxe) : wexte  wekî dinya li dora we digere	H10 Schwindel (z.B. Gleichgewicht verlieren)
“I” Do you feel dizzy sometimes ?
“R” Yes, when i get upset .  3
H11 Heart complaints (e.g. palpitations, fast heartbeats)	H11 dle ta deshe	H11 Herzbeschwerden (z.B. Herzrasen)
“I” Do you have heart problems ?
“R” No .
H12 Gastrointestinal disorders (e.g. stomach-aches, diarrhea, nausea)	H12 maade ta(mida ta) deshe misal verek,varshe, zek eshek	H12 Magen-Darmbeschwerden (z.B. Durchfall, Übelkeit, Bauchschmerzen)
“I” Do you have gastrointestinal problems ?
“R” Before a while i had a bad stomach ache because of the dirty water i drank during the captivity, but i went to many times, now i feel better .
H13 Do you have any other symptoms?	H13 li jem te sebebin din hene (araad)?	H13 Haben Sie weitere Symptome?
Group	Group	
H14 Other symptoms, please specify one here	H14 Heger tiştekî din hebe, hûn bibêjin	H14 Andere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie diese
H15 How much are you suffering from the symptom you just mentioned?	H15 Heger tu pirsgirêkên we hebin, Hûn wana çiqas bi êş dijîn?	H15 Falls Sie an weiteren Beschwerden leiden, wie stark leiden Sie darunter?
H16 Other symptoms, please specify another here	H16 heger sebebin din hene xwere xwe beje chine?	H16 Falls weitere Symptome, bitte beschreiben Sie weitere
H17 How much are you suffering from the second symptom you just mentioned, if any?	H17 chiqes tu ji we sebebe dishe? Heger heye?	H17 Wie sehr leiden Sie unter dem zweiten Symtom, das Sie genannt haben?
H18 How do you explain these effects of the ISIS violence on your health?	H18  Hûn van tiştên şîddeta DAÎŞê li ser xwe (sehet) (saxbun) çawa dibînin?	H18 Wie erklären Sie sich diese Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit?
“I” Do you think that that violent experience has affected your health and that’s why you have thes illnesses ?
“R” Yes, after the overthinking of what i’ve been through i have bad headaches, and my eyes hurt because of crying all the time ? 
H19 How important are the following concepts for you in explaining the effects of the ISIS violence on your health:	H19 chiqas je tara muhme ev xiarate eze neha bejem, na bushbuna Daesh chiqas le sar saxbuna ta tasir kir?	H19 Wie wichtig sind die folgenden Konzepte für Sie, um sich die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt auf Ihre Gesundheit zu erklären?
“I” Now we will mention some of illnesses and you will tell us why do have, if you have any ?
“R” Ok .
H20 Psychological causes (i.e. reaction of your mind or psyche to the ISIS violence)	H20  Sabebe nafsi misal( rad fel)	H20 Psychologische Ursachen (z.B. psychische Reaktion auf IS-Gewalt)
“I” Do you think headaches because of psychological causes ?
“R” No i don’t have psychological problems .
H21 Physical causes (i.e. reaction of your body to ISIS violence or physical stress reaction)	H21 lashe ta, misal  (rad fel) tafzi, eshek, asbi	H21 Physische Prozesse (z.B. körperliche Reaktionen, auf IS-Gewalt oder physische Stressreaktion)
“I” Then is it after physical problems ?
“R” I think my illness is all because of the overthinking . 
“I” But overthinking is psychological disorder too? 
“R”  Yes, but i’m not like my friend who is very damaged, she can’t sleep if she doesn’t take some medicines . 
H22 Supernatural influences (e.g. negative forces as the cause for symptoms)	H22 teshte na bash(misal, shedete(kwet) salbi)	H22 Übernatürliche Einflüsse (z.B. böse Kräfte als Ursache der Symptome)
“I” Yazidi have specific words they don’t spell because it’s blasphemy, but Muslims think that’s what Yazidi do or believe in is disbelieving, and that's’ why Yazdi have live through all these problems ? 
“R” No .
H23 Religious causes (e.g. punishment of God for sins)	H23 jezaye xode je ber gunaha	H23 religiöse Ursachen (z.B. Bestrafung durch Gott für Sünden)
“I” Do you it’s because you under divine wrath and punishment ?
“R” No .
H24 How does the violence you experienced affect your relationship with other people?	H24 pisbune (nebashbune)daishe ji ware chu tesire peywandiye  navbera we u milete kiri?	H24 Wie wirkt sich die Gewalt, die Sie erlebten, auf Ihre Beziehungen mit anderen Menschen aus?
“I” Have you changed or no ?
“R” No, i haven’t .
H25 How does your experience of violence by ISIS affect your daily life in the Yazidi community?	H25 nav melate ezidya ev teshte geh hate sare ta, cawa tasire xa le sar roj ta haye?	H25 Und wie wirkt sich diese Erfahrung auf Ihren Alltag in der Gemeinschaft der Jesiden aus?
“I” Does that experience affected you relationship with Yazid, do they respect you or no ?
“I” Some of them they don’t, but there are some others respect us now more than before .
H26 If you feel excluded from the Yazidi community, how much do you feel that exclusion?	H26 Heger tu ji cemaata êzidîyan hatibi dûrxistin, tu vî dûrxistina çawa dibinî?	H26 Falls Sie sich von der jesidischen Gemeinschaft ausgeschlossen fühlen, wie stark fühlen Sie diese Ausgrenzung?
H27 How did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your faith?	H27 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesirkir ser imane (bawari) we?	H27 Wie beeinflusste die erlebte IS-Gewalt Ihren Glauben?
“I” Has that violent experience changed your faith in your religion ? or you aren’t big believer ?
“R” I still believe in my religion and stronger than before .
H28 How strongly did your experience of violence by ISIS affect your yazidi faith?	H28 pisbune (nebashbune) daishe ji ware chu tesir imane (bawari)  we ji bo diyanet yizidi?	H28 Wie stark beeinflusste die IS-Gewalt Ihren jesidischen Glauben?
H29 How do you cope with the effects you have described from the ISIS violence?	H29 Gelo tu çawa li ber van tiştên ku te behs kir didî?	H29 Wie können Sie die Auswirkungen der eben beschriebenen IS-Gewalt bewältigen?
“I” How do you cope with your stress and depress ?
“R” How sad a person feels won’t help him or changes anything, so i’ve strengthened myself and I think positively, if we are weak and damaged ISIS will be happy of what they did to us, that’s why i make myself stronger .
H30 What can you do for symptom relief?	H30  çi karî tu bikî ji bona rehetbûna xwe (nishan)?	H30 Was können Sie zur Linderung der Symptome tun?
“I” What do you do to cope with that and how ?
“R” Actually it needs a hard fight , it’s not a simple thing to be forgotten so quick and easily but i try my best to don’t get upset and take it positively . 
H31 How much do the following strategies help you cope with the effects of the ISIS violence?	H31 Ev stratejîyên jêr çiqas alikarîya bi tere kir li ber pisbune (nabashbune) şîddeta DSÎŞê :	H31 Wie sehr helfen Ihnen die folgenden Strategien die Auswirkungen der IS-Gewalt zu bewältigen?
“I” Now we will mention you few ways, and you can tell us how much each one helps you ?
“R” Ok .
H32 Believe in collective strength (e.g. strength of the Yazidi community or your family)	H32   te heziye xwe ji bawerbune di tefgeri xwe bir ( tefgeriye yizidi yan malbet)	H32 Glaube an gemeinschaftliche Stärke (z.B. Stärke der jesidischen Gemeinschaft oder Ihrer Familie)
“I“ Does talking to your mom make you stronger ?
“R” Yes, much better 3 
H33 Believe in personal strength (e.g. believe in yourself or your own strength)	H33 baweriya te ya hêza şexsî (b.m. Bawerîya te ji bo te û ya şexsî)	H33 Glaube an persönliche Stärke (z.B. Glaube an sich selbst, an Ihre eigene Stärke)
“I” Do you believe in your own personal strength ? 
“R” Yes, very much .
H34 Praying	H34 limê kirin	H34 Beten
“I” Does praying help you ?
“R” Yes, very much .
H35 Retreat (e.g. spending time alone)	H35 bi tene hizdki wexte xwe derbeski	H35 Rückzug (Zeit alleine verbringen)
“I” Do you like to be alone by your own self ?
“R” No, i don’t like .
H36 Avoidance (e.g. avoiding things that remind you of ISIS)	H36 Rev/baz(b.m. Reva ji tiştên ku DAÎŞê tîne bîra we)	H36 Vermeidung (Dinge vermeiden, die Sie an den IS erinnern)
“I”  Do you try to avoid thinking of it  ?
“R” Yes, very much .
H37 Exchange trauma contents with others	H37 Bi kesên din re, behskirina sadmet (trauma) bikin	H37 Austausch über Traumainhalte mit anderen
“I” Do you exchange trauma contents with your friends ?
“R” Yes, with my friends . 4
H38 Seeking professional help (e.g. doctors, psycho-therapists)	H38 Lêgerîna alîkarîya profesyonelî/moxts (b.m. dixtor psîko-terapîst)	H38 sich professionelle Hilfe suchen (z.B. Ärzte / Psychotherapeuten)
“I” Do the psychologists help you ?
“R” Yes, 3
H39 Seeking help within the Yazidi community	H39  alîkarîya di nav cemeatê (tefger) yizidiye bigerin	H39 sich Hilfe innerhalb der jesidischen Gemeinschaft suchen
“I” Do Yazidi people help you, if you need something ?
“R” Yes, 3 
H40 Do you have any other strategies that help you cope?	H40 Heger tiştekî din hebe.	H40 Haben Sie weitere Strategien, die Ihnen bei der Bewältigung helfen?
Group	Group	
H41 Other strategies, please specify one here	H41 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H41 Andere, bitte nennen Sie diese
H42 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H42 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H42 Falls sie weitere Bewältigungsstrategien angegeben haben, wie stark helfen diese Ihnen?
H43 Other strategies, please specify another here	H43 ji keremea xwe bibêjin	H43 Falls Sie noch weitere Strategien verwenden, bitte nennen Sie eine weitere
H44 How much would you say the strategy you just mentioned helps you?	H44 Heger hûn behsa stratejiyên ku alikarîya berxwadana we dikin bikin, gelo hûn dikarin ev çiqas alikariya we dike?	H44 Wie sehr hilft Ihnen die Strategie, die Sie eben genannt haben?
H45 Now, I am going to name several forms of professional health care aids. Please tell me if you already had contact with them or received them. If you did, please tell me how much each one improved your well-being.	H45 Niha ezê navê  reya  bidim we. ji kerema xwe ji min re bibêjin ku hûn van dizanin û we ew girtine yan na?heger we w e kiribe evane çiqas piştgiriya we	H45 Ich werde Ihnen nun mehrere Arten von professionellen Hilfsangeboten nennen. Bitte sagen Sie mir, ob Sie diese Art vn Hilfe bereits in Anspruch genommen haben. Falls ja, bitte sagen Sie mir wie stark die einzelnen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden verbesserten.
H46 Medication (e.g. anti-depressant or medicine that improves your mood)	H46 îlaç (derman)	H46 Medikamente (Psychopharmaka / Medikamente, die die Stimmung und psychische Gesundheit verbessern)
H47 Psychologists	H47 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi)	H47 Psychologen
H48 Individual psychotherapy	H48 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî	H48 Einzel-Psychotherapie
H49 Group psychotherapy	H49 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan	H49 Gruppen-Psychotherapie
H50 Religious or traditional healer	H50 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari)	H50 Religiöse oder Traditionelle Heiler
H51 Herbal medicine	H51 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati)	H51 Pflanzliche Medizin
H52 Social work or help with daily structure (e.g. childcare)	H52 Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane  (e.g. Nêrîna zarokan)	H52 Sozialarbeit oder Hilfe bei der Tagesstrukturierung (z.B. Kinderbetreuung)
H53 Doctor or physician	H53 toxter?	H53 Ärzte
H54 If doctor or physicians: how much did it help?	H54 Toxter:  Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H54 Falls Ärzte: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H55 If medication: how much did it help?	H55 îlaç (derman): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H55 Falls Medikamente: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” Do you take medicines ?
“R” Yes .
“I” What about herbal medicines ?
“R” I drink some mint tea, when i have sore throat .
H56 If psychologists: how much did it help?	H56 doxtor pisîkolog (nefsi): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H56 Falls Psychologen: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” Do the psychologist help and how did you attend individual or collective sessions ?
“R” Yes, individual, but not very much, 3
H57 If individual psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H57 Psîkoterapîya Şexsî: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H57 Falls Einzel-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H58 If group psychotherapy: how much did it help?	H58 Psîkoterapîya Grûpan: Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H58 Falls Gruppen-psychotherapie: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H59 If religious or traditional healer: how much did it help?	H59 hekime(ilackari) dini (oldari): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîy kir? H59 Falls religiöse oder traditionelle Heiler: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” How much visiting Lalesh help you ?
“R” Yes, very much .
H60 If herbal medicine: how much did it help?	H60 Îlacên nebatan (ilace normal wek chayi nebati): Heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H60 Falls pflanzliche Medizin: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
H61 If social work: how much did it help?	H61  Xebatên be Grupan yan jî alîkarîya karên rojane: heger cewaba be "erê"be, ew çiqas alîkarîyawe kir?	H61 Falls Sozialarbeit: Wie sehr half das Ihnen?
“I” Do the administrator or the person in charge of your affairs, help you ?
“R” Yes, very much . 
“I” Have you seen doctors, were they useful ?
“R” Yes, 4
H62 How do you think these professional aids might improve your well-being?	H62 Gelo li (nirine we) gorî we ev alîkariyên profesyonel dê çawa alîkarîya we bike?	H63 Wie glauben Sie verbessern diese professionellen Hilfsangebote Ihr Wohlbefinden?
“I” How do the professionals help ?
“R” Whenever i have a problem they help me to sort it out .
“I” What could they help you ?
“R” If i have a problem, they ask me to talk about it, then they give me some pieces of advice, i do as they say even if it didn’t work, but i try to trust their efforts and that’s make me better .
H64 What kind of professional help would you like to receive but have not received yet?	H64  Gelo hûn(le nirine we) çi cûre alîkarîya profesyonel dixwazin lê heya niha we negirtîye?	H64 Welche Art professioneller Hilfe würden Sie gerne in Anspruch nehmen, haben sie aber bisher nicht bekommen?
“I” What kind of help you expected to get, but you haven’t got yet ?
“R” No .
H65 Below is a list of difficulties people sometimes have after stressful life events. Please indicate how distressing each difficulty has been for you DURING THE PAST SEVEN DAYS	H65 Li jêr lîsteyeke( kaeme) dijwarîyên ku mirov piştî bûyerên jîyaneke stresê dijî heye. Ji kerema xwe behsa dijwarîya tiştan bikin DI VÊ HEFTA VÊ DAWÎ de	H65 Ich nenne Ihnen jetzt einige Probleme, die Menschen manchmal nach belastenden Lebensereignissen haben. Geben Sie bitte an, wie bedrängend jedes Problem für Sie IN DEN LETZEN SIEBEN TAGEN war
“I” We will mention you a few things and you will tell us, how much have you got during the last 7 days ?
“R” Ok .
H66 Any reminder brought back feelings about it	H66 Gelo tu tiştek van hêstan anî bîra we	H66 Immer, wenn ich an das Ereignis erinnert wurde, kehrten die Gefühle wieder.
“I” When you remember then do you feel badly about it ?
“R” Yes, 4 
H67 I had trouble staying asleep	H67 Min pirsgirêka xewê jîya (moshkiled xewkirine hebu)	H67 Ich hatte Schwierigkeiten, nachts durchzuschlafen.
“I” Do you have sleeping problems ?
“R” When i go to bed late, yes i have difficulty to sleep, but i go to bed early no, and if i watch facebook , i feel bad and can’t sleep . when i watch bad news happening in Iraq i can’t sleep till the morning .
“I” How often does that happen to you ?
“R” 2-3 times a week .
H68 Other things kept making me think about it	H68 Tiştên din min xist nava fikirandina wê	H68 Andere Dinge erinnerten mich immer wieder daran.
“I” When you remember those things do their pictures still pop into your mind ?
“R” Yes, a lot .
H69 I felt irritable and angry	H69 Ez xwe bi hêrs û nerehet hîs kir	H69 Ich fühlte mich reizbar und ärgerlich.
“I” When you remember them do become irritable and nervous ?
“R” Before yes, i was, but now i get used to stand it , 2
H70 I avoided letting myself get upset when I thought about it or was reminded of it	H70 Dema ku ez ev bûyer hate heşê min an jî ku hate gotin, min xwe ji fikra xemgînbûnê dûr xist.	H70 Ich versuchte mich nicht aufzuregen, wenn ich daran dachte oder daran erinnert wurde.
“I” When you remember them, can you avoid being upset or or you can’t control your feelings ?
“R” No, i can’t control my feelings .
H71 I thought about it when I didn't mean to	H71 ez pe defkrim, dema men na dexast	H71 Ich habe auch darüber nachgedacht, wenn ich es nicht wollte
“I” You keep thinking of it even when you don’t mean to ?
“R” My own story is very bad, but i can manage to avoid it, but i can’t stop thinking of my family  . 
H72 I felt as if it hadn't happened or wasn't real	H72 Hîssa min wekî ku ev tişt nehat serê min û nerast bû	H72 Es kam mir vor, als ob es gar nicht geschehen wäre oder irgenwie unwirklich war.
“I” Do you feel like it wasn’t real ?
“R” Yes, 3 
H73 I stayed away from reminders of it	H73 Min xwe ji tiştên ku têdixiste bîra min xwe dûr xist.	H73 Ich versuchte, Erinnerungen daran aus dem Weg zu gehen.
“I” You can’t stop thinking of them 
“R” Yes, i can’t stop .
H74 Pictures about it popped into my mind	H74 suret e ten sari ta	H74 Bilder, die mit dem Ereignis zu tun hatten, kamen mir plötzlich in den Sinn.
H75 I was jumpy and easily startled	H75 Ez tirsîyam û bi rehetî ketim nav tirsê	H75 Ich war leicht reizbar und schreckhaft.
“I” Do you have strong feelings about it in your heart ?
“R” Yes .
H76 I tried not to think about it	H76 Min hewl da ku nefikirim.	H76 Ich habe versucht, nicht daran zu denken.
H77 I was aware that I still had a lot of feelings about it, but I didn't deal with them	H77 Ez ji hebûna fikrên wan haydar bûm (zani), lê min guhê nadaie.	H77 Ich merkte zwar, dass meine Gefühle durch das Ereignis noch sehr aufgewühlt waren, aber ich beschäftigte mich nicht mit ihnen.
H78 My feelings about it were kind of numb	H78 Hestên min di derheqê wê de, wekî cureyeke lalbûnê bû( moxder)	H78 Die Gefühle, die das Ereignis in mir auslösten, waren ein bisschen wie abgestumpft.
“I” Do you feel like you are alive but senseless ?
“R” Yes, 2
H79 I found myself acting or feeling like I was back at that time	H79 Min xwe wekî lîstina rolekê an jî wekî ku ez ji demê paş ve hîs kir.	H79 Ich stellte fest, dass ich handelte oder fühlte, als ob ich in die Zeit (des Ereignisses) zurückversetzt sei.
“I” Do you have feelings that you are once again between ISIS hands ?
“R” Yes, 0
H80 I had trouble falling asleep	H80 Min zehmetîya raketin(xewkirin) hîs kir.	H80 Ich konnte nicht einschlafen.
H81 I had waves of strong feelings about it	H81 Bi min re pêlên hestên dijwar çêbûn- bi miro hisik mekin chebu ji derheqe we	H81 Es kam vor, dass die Gefühle, die mit dem Ereignis zusammenhingen, plötzlich für kurze Zeit viel heftiger wurden.
“I” Do you have sometimes strong feeling and sometimes you don’t feel of it at all ?
“R” I always have strong feeling about it .
H82 I tried to remove it from my memory	H82 Min hewl da ku ez ji bîra xwe derxim.	H82 Ich habe versuchte, es (das Ereignis) aus meiner Erinnerung zustreichen.
“I” Have you tried to remove it from your memory ?
“R” Yes .
H83 I had trouble concentrating	H83 Min zehmetîya lê hûrbûnê (terkiz) hîs kir.	H83 Es fiel mir schwer, mich zu konzentrieren.
“I” Do you lose concentration ?
“R” No .
H84 Reminders of it caused me to have physical reactions, such as sweating, trouble breathing, nausea, or a pounding heart	H84 waxte dehat bira men, lasha men xu da, nafse men tang bu, madi men le hav kat, dli men be kwat lekat	H84 Die Erinnerungen daran lösten bei mir körperliche Reaktionen aus, wie Schwitzen, Atemnot, Schwindel oder Herzklopfen.
H85 I had dreams about it	H85 Min di derheqê wê de xewnan dît.	H85 Ich träumte davon.
I Do you have a lot of dreams ? 
R Yes
H86 I felt watchful and on guard	H86 Min xwe baldar û di nobettê de hîs kir.	H86 Ich empfand mich selber als sehr vorsichtig, aufmerksam oder hellhörig.
“I” Do you feel like you lost your sight or hearing of surrounding ?
“R” No .
H87 I tried not to talk about it	H87 Min hewl da ku ez di derheqeê we de xeber nedim.	H87 Ich versuchte, nicht darüber zu sprechen.
“I” Can you openly talk about it or no ?
“R” Yes, i can, it’s normal .
H88 Thank you for these responses.	H88 ez sipasiye we dikim ji bu bersive we dat	H88 Danke für diese Antworten.
H89 Finally to conclude, can you tell me what was the most positive experience you had within the last two years in Germany?	H89 Pirsa herî dawî, tecrûbeya we herî xweş ku tu li Almanyayê jiyayî çi ne?	H89 Können Sie mir zum Abschluss sagen, was die positivsten Erfahrungen waren, die Sie innerhalb der letzten zwei Jahre in Deutschland hatten?
“I” What are the best things you found in living in Germany ?
“R” Everything is good, the best is there are laws , they helped us , and a person can a lot of things .
H90 How satisfied would you say you are with the Special Quota Project at this time?	H90  tu chiqas kani beji ew projekta (mashrou) special quota bash bu?	H90 Wie erfolgreich würden Sie das Sonderkontingent zu diesem Zeitpunkt bewerten?
“I” What do you think about this project which brought you by plane from Iraq and gave you homes to participate here, what else ? 
“R” I told you before without this project we were like orphans in Iraq, now we have doctors, learning language . 
H91 What are the three most positive aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opiinion?	H91 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya bash be ta ra darbas bun je projekte special Quota?	H91 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 positivsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
“I” What are the 3 best things about it ?
“R” I haven’t seen anything bad about it , except for we don’t understand ourselves we don’t know till when . i haven’t seen anything else bad about it .
H92 What are the three most negative aspects of the Special Quota Project in your opinion?	H92 ka nav se(3) tecrubeya Na bash be ta ra darbas bun je projechte special Quota?	H92 Was sind Ihrer Meinung nach die 3 negativsten Aspekte des Sonderkontignents?
H93 And what gives you hope for the future?	H93 che neren (Amale) je roja peshra (Mostakbel)?	H93 Und was gibt Ihnen Hoffnung für die Zukunft?  
“I” What do you plan for the future ?
“R” I haven't thought about this yet .